--- Page 1 ---
1
17. The Divisions of Faith
TEXT 1
AJauRNa ovac )
Yae XaañiviDaMauTSa*JYa YaJaNTae é[ÖYaaiNvTaa" )
Taeza& iNaïa Tau k-a k*-Z<a SatvMaahae rJaSTaMa" )) 1 ))
arjuna uväca
ye çästra-vidhim utsåjya
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
teñäà niñöhä tu kä kåñëa
sattvam äho rajas tamaù
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; ye—those; çästra-vidhim—the regulations of
scripture; utsåjya—giving up; yajante—worships; çraddhayä—full faith;
anvitäù—possessed of; teñäm—of them; niñöhä—faith; tu—but; kä—what is
that; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; sattvam—in goodness; äho—said; rajaù—in passion;
tamaù—in ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O Kåñëa, what is the situation of one who does not follow the
principles of scripture but worships according to his own imagination? Is he in
goodness, in passion or in ignorance?


--- Page 2 ---
2
PURPORT
In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person faithful to
a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to the stage of
knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of peace and prosperity.
In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that one who does not follow the
principles laid down in the scriptures is called an asura, demon, and one who
follows the scriptural injunctions faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now, if
one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna is to be cleared by
Kåñëa. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and
placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness, passion or ignorance? Do
such persons attain the perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be
situated in real knowledge and elevate themselves to the highest perfectional
stage? Do those who do not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures
but who have faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men
attain success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Kåñëa.


--- Page 3 ---
3


--- Page 4 ---
4
TEXT 2
é[q>aGavaNauvac )
i}aivDaa >aviTa é[Öa deihNaa& Saa Sv>aavJaa )
Saaitvk-I raJaSaq cEv TaaMaSaq ceiTa Taa& é*<au )) 2 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
tri-vidhä bhavati çraddhä
dehinäà sä svabhäva-jä
sättviké räjasé caiva
tämasé ceti täà çåëu
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;
tri-vidhä—three kinds; bhavati—become; çraddhä—faith; dehinäm—of the
embodied; sä—that; sva-bhäva-jä—according to his mode of material nature;
sättviké—mode of goodness; räjasé—mode of passion; ca—also; eva—certainly;
tämasé—mode of ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus; täm—that; såëu—hear from
Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the
embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds—goodness, passion or
ignorance. Now hear about these.
PURPORT
Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of
laziness or indolence, give up following these rules and regulations, are
governed by the modes of material nature. According to their previous
activities in the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature
which is of a specific quality. The association of the living entity with the


--- Page 5 ---
5
different modes of nature has been going on perpetually since the living entity
is in contact with material nature. Thus he acquires different types of
mentality according to his association with the material modes. But this nature
can be changed if one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by
his rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from
ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is that
blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person become
elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things carefully, with
intelligence, in the association of a bona fide spiritual master. Thus one can
change his position to a higher mode of nature.
TEXT 3
SatvaNauæPaa SavRSYa é[Öa >aviTa >aarTa )
é[ÖaMaYaae_Ya& Pauåzae Yaae YaC^\Ö" Sa Wv Sa" )) 3 ))
sattvänurüpä sarvasya
çraddhä bhavati bhärata
çraddhämayo 'yaà puruño
yo yac chraddhaù sa eva saù
sattva-anurüpä—according 
to 
the 
existence; 
sarvasya—of 
everyone;
çraddhä—faith; 
bhavati—becomes; 
bhärata—O 
son 
of 
Bhärata;
çraddhä—faith; 
mayaù—full; 
ayam—this; 
puruñaù—living 
entity;
yaù—anyone; yat—that; çraddhaù—faith; saù—that; eva—certainly; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
According to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves
a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith
according to the modes he has acquired.


--- Page 6 ---
6
PURPORT
Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But his faith
is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has
acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of faith, one associates with
certain persons. Now the real fact is that every living being, as is stated in the
Fifteenth Chapter, is originally the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord. Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of material
nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature in conditional life,
he generates his own position by association with the different varieties of
material nature. The resultant artificial faith and existence are only material.
Although one may be conducted by some impression, or some conception of
life, still, originally, he is nirguëa, or transcendental. Therefore one has to
become cleansed of the material contamination that he has acquired in order
to regain his relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back
without fear: Kåñëa consciousness. If one is situated in Kåñëa consciousness,
then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectional stage. If one
does not take to this path of self-realization, then he is surely to be conducted
by the influence of the modes of nature.
The word sattva, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sattva or faith
always comes out of the works of goodness. One's faith may be in a demigod or
some created God or some mental concoction. It is supposed to be one's strong
faith in something that is productive of the works of material goodness. But in
material conditional life, no works of material nature are completely purified.
They are mixed. They are not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is
transcendental; in purified goodness one can understand the real nature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As long as one's faith is not completely in
purified goodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes of
material nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand to the


--- Page 7 ---
7
heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in contact with a
particular mode of material nature, one's faith is established. It should be
understood, that if one's heart is in the mode of goodness, his faith is also in
the mode of goodness. If his heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in
the mode of passion. And if his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his
faith is also thus contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this
world, and there are different types of religions due to different types of faith.
The real principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure goodness,
but because the heart is tainted, we find different types of religious principles.
Thus according to different types of faith, there are different kinds of worship.
TEXT 4
YaJaNTae Saaitvk-a devaNYa+ar+aa&iSa raJaSaa" )
Pa[eTaaN>aUTaGa<aa&êaNYae YaJaNTae TaaMaSaa JaNaa" )) 4 ))
yajante sättvikä devän
yakña-rakñäàsi räjasäù
pretän bhüta-gaëäàç cänye
yajante tämasä janäù
yajante—worship; sättvikäù—those who are in the mode of goodness;
devän—demigods; yakña-rakñäàsi räjasäù—those who are in the mode of
passion worship demons; pretän—dead spirits; bhüta-gaëän—ghosts; ca
anye—and others; yajante—worship; tämasäù—in the mode of ignorance;
janäù—people.
TRANSLATION
Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts


--- Page 8 ---
8
and spirits.
PURPORT
In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different kinds
of worshipers according to their external activities. According to scriptural
injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshipable, but those
who are not very conversant with, or faithful to, the scriptural injunctions
worship different objects, according to their specific situations in the modes of
material nature. Those who are situated in goodness generally worship the
demigods. The demigods include Brahmä, Çiva and others such as Indra,
Candra and the sun-god. There are various demigods. Those in goodness
worship a particular demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are
in the mode of passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second
World War, a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he
had amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market. Similarly,
those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally select a powerful man to
be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped as God and that the same
results will be obtained.
Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of passion
worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of ignorance, in
darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some
dead man. Sexual service is also considered to be in the mode of darkness.
Similarly, in remote villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have
seen that in India the lower class people sometimes go to the forest, and if they
have knowledge that a ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer
sacrifices. These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. God
worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure goodness. In
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said, sattvaà viçuddham väsudeva-çabditam. "When
a man is situated in pure goodness, he worships Väsudeva." The purport is that
those who are completely purified of the material modes of nature and who are


--- Page 9 ---
9
transcendentally situated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and
they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal Viñëu, or
Viñëu form in the material world, which is known as philosophized Viñëu.
Viñëu is the expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the
impersonalists, because they do not ultimately believe in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, imagine that the Viñëu form is just another aspect of
the impersonal Brahman; similarly, they imagine that Lord Brahmä is the
impersonal form in the material mode of passion. Thus they sometimes describe
five kinds of gods that are worshipable, but because they think that the actual
truth is impersonal Brahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the
ultimate end. In conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of
nature can be purified through association with persons who are of
transcendental nature.
TEXTS 5-6
AXaañivihTa& gaaer& TaPYaNTae Yae TaPaae JaNaa" )
dM>aahªarSa&Yau¢-a" k-aMaraGabl/aiNvTaa" )) 5 ))
k-zRYaNTa" XarqrSQa& >aUTaGa]aMaMaceTaSa" )
Maa& cEvaNTa" XarqrSQa& TaaiNvÖyaSauriNaêYaaNa( )) 6 ))
açästra-vihitaà ghoraà
tapyante ye tapo janäù
dambhähaìkära-saàyuktäù
käma-räga-balänvitäù
karñayantaù çaréra-sthaà
bhüta-grämam acetasaù
mäà caiväntaù çaréra-sthaà


--- Page 10 ---
10
tän viddhy äsura-niçcayän
açästra—not 
mentioned 
in 
the 
scriptures; 
vihitam—directed;
ghoram—harmful 
to 
others; 
tapyante—undergo 
penances; 
ye—those;
tapaù—austerities; 
janäù—persons; 
dambha—pride; 
ahaìkära—egotism;
saàyuktäù—engaged; 
käma—lust; 
räga—attachment; 
bala—force;
anvitäù—impelled 
by; 
karñayantaù—tormenting; 
çaréra-stham—situated
within 
the 
body; 
bhütagrämam—combination 
of 
material 
elements;
acetasaù—by such a misled mentality; mäm—to Me; ca—also; eva—certainly;
antaù—within; 
çaréra-stham—situated 
in 
the 
body; 
tän—them;
viddhi—understand; äsura—demons; niçcayän—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the
scriptures, performing them out of pride, egotism, lust and attachment, who are
impelled by passion and who torture their bodily organs as well as the Supersoul
dwelling within are to be known as demons.
PURPORT
There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some
ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in
the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual
advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to
such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gétä, certainly demoniac. Their acts
are against the scriptural injunction and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for
material enjoyment. By such activities, not only are the combination of
material elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such


--- Page 11 ---
11
unauthorized fasting or austerities for some political end are certainly very
disturbing to others. They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A
demoniac person may think that he can force his enemy or other parties to
comply with his desire by this method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting.
These acts are not approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He
says that those who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are
insults to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in
disobedience to the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasaù is
significant in this connection—persons of normal mental condition must obey
the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect and
disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities and
penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of the demoniac
people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them to take birth
in the womb of demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by demoniac
principles life after life without knowing their relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough to be
guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom,
they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.
TEXT 7
AaharSTviPa SavRSYa i}aivDaae >aviTa iPa[Ya" )
YajSTaPaSTaQaa daNa& Taeza& >aediMaMa& é*<au )) 7 ))
ähäras tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyaù
yajïas tapas tathä dänaà
teñäà bhedam imaà çåëu
ähäraù—eating; 
tu—certainly; 
api—also; 
sarvasya—of 
everyone;
trividhaù—three kinds; bhavati—there are; priyaù—dear; yajïaù—sacrifice;


--- Page 12 ---
12
tapaù—austerity; 
tathä—also; 
dänam—charity; 
teñäm—of 
them;
bhedam—differences; imam—thus; çåëu—hear.
TRANSLATION
Even food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the three modes
of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity. Listen,
and I shall tell you of the distinctions of these.
PURPORT
In terms of different situations and the modes of material nature, there are
differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices, austerities and
charities. They are not all conducted on the same level. Those who can
understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of
material nature are actually wise; those who consider all kinds of sacrifice or
foods or charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish.
There are missionary workers who advocate that one can do whatever he likes
and attain perfection. But these foolish guides are not acting according to the
direction of the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the
people in general.
TEXT 8-10
AaYau"Satvbl/araeGYaSau%Pa[qiTaivvDaRNaa" )
rSYaa" iòGDaa" iSQara ôÛa Aahara" Saaitvk-iPa[Yaa" )) 8 ))
k-Èãl/v<aaTYauZ<aTaq+<aæ+aivdaihNa" )
Aahara raJaSaSYaeía du"%Xaaek-aMaYaPa[da" )) 9 ))
YaaTaYaaMa& GaTarSa& PaUiTa PaYauRizTa& c YaTa( )


--- Page 13 ---
13
oiC^íMaiPa caMaeDYa& >aaeJaNa& TaaMaSaiPa[YaMa( )) 10 ))
äyuù-sattva-balärogya-
sukha-préti-vivardhanäù
rasyäù snigdhäù sthirä hådyä
ähäräù sättvika-priyäù
kaöv-amla-lavaëäty-uñëa-
tékñëa-rükña-vidähinaù
ähärä räjasasyeñöä
duùkha-çokämaya-pradäù
yäta-yämaà gata-rasaà
püti paryuñitaà ca yat
ucchiñöam api cämedhyaà
bhojanaà tämasa-priyam
äyuù—duration of life; sattva—existence; bala—strength; ärogya—health;
sukha—happiness; 
préti—and 
satisfaction; 
vivardhanäù—increasing;
rasyäù—juicy; snigdhäù—fatty; sthiräù—enduring; hådyäù—pleasing to the
heart; ähäräù—food; sättvika—to one in goodness; priyäù—palatable.
TRANSLATION
Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one's
existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such nourishing
foods are sweet, juicy, fattening and palatable. Foods that are too bitter, too
sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked by people in the modes of passion.
Such foods cause pain, distress, and disease. Food cooked more than three hours
before being eaten, which is tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is
food liked by people in the mode of ignorance.


--- Page 14 ---
14
PURPORT
Thc purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and
aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past, great authorities
selected those foods that best aid health and increase life's duration, such as
milk products, sugar, rice, wheat, fruits and vegetables. These foods are very
dear to those in the mode of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn
and molasses, while not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant
when mixed with milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness.
All these foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable
things like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth verse, have
no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal fat is available in
the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all foods. Milk, butter, cheese
and similar products give animal fat in a form which rules out any need for the
killing of innocent creatures. It is only through brute mentality that this killing
goes on. The civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk. Slaughter is
the way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split peas, dhall,
whole wheat, etc.
Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot or overly
mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucous in the stomach,
leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness are essentially
those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than three hours before it is
eaten (except prasädam, food offered to the Lord) is considered to be in the
mode of darkness. Because they are decomposing, such foods give a bad odor,
which often attracts people in this mode but repulses those in the mode of
goodness.
Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was
first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly persons, especially
the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of food are considered to be in
the mode of darkness, and they increase infection or disease. Such foodstuffs,


--- Page 15 ---
15
although very palatable to persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked
nor even touched by those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the
remnant of what is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
Bhagavad-gétä the Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of
vegetables, flour and milk when offered with devotion. Patraà puñpaà phalaà
toyam. Of course, devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme
Personality of Godhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasädam
should be prepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunction of
the scripture offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be taken even
if prepared long, long ago, because such food is transcendental. Therefore to
make food antiseptic, eatable and palatable for all persons, one should offer
food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 11
Af-l/ak-ax(i+ai>aYaRjae iviDad*íae Ya wJYaTae )
YaíVYaMaeveiTa MaNa" SaMaaDaaYa Sa Saaitvk-" )) 11 ))
aphaläkäìkñibhir yajïo
vidhi-diñöo ya ijyate
yañöavyam eveti manaù
samädhäya sa sättvikaù
aphala-käïkñibhiù—devoid 
of 
desire 
for 
result; 
yajïaù—sacrifice;
vidhi—accordingly; 
dåñtaù—direction; 
yaù—anyone; 
ijyate—performs;
yañöavyam—must be performed; eva—certainly; iti—thus; manaù—mind;
samädhäya—fixed in; saù—he; sättvikaù—is in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
Of sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to scriptural


--- Page 16 ---
16
rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the nature of goodness.
PURPORT
The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind, but
here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any such desire. It
should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example, the performance of
rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they are performed with the
purpose of material benefit, but that is not in the mode of goodness. One
should go to a temple or church as a matter of duty, offer respect to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and offer flowers and eatables. Everyone
thinks that there is no use in going to the temple just to worship God. But
worship for economic benefit is not recommended in the scriptural injunction.
One should go simply to offer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the
mode of goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions
of the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 12
Ai>aSaNDaaYa Tau f-l&/ dM>aaQaRMaiPa cEv YaTa( )
wJYaTae >arTaé[eï Ta& Yaj& iviÖ raJaSaMa( )) 12 ))
abhisandhäya tu phalaà
dambhärtham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-çreñöha
taà yajïaà viddhi räjasam
abhisandhäya—desiring; 
tu—but; 
phalam—the 
result; 
dambha—pride;
artham—material benefits; api—also; ca—and; eva—certainly; yat—that
which; ijyate—worship; bharata-çreñöha—O chief of the Bhäratas; tam—that;
yajïam—sacrifice; viddhi—know; räjasam—in the mode of passion.


--- Page 17 ---
17
TRANSLATION
But that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or performed
ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, O chief of the Bhäratas.
PURPORT
Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the heavenly
kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such sacrifices or
ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode of passion.
TEXT 13
iviDahqNaMaSa*íaà& MaN}ahqNaMadi+a<aMa( )
é[ÖaivrihTa& Yaj& TaaMaSa& Pairc+aTae )) 13 ))
vidhi-hénam asåñöännaà
mantra-hénam adakñiëam
çraddhä-virahitaà yajïaà
tämasaà paricakñate
vidhi-hénam—without 
scriptural 
direction; 
asåñöa-annam—without
distribution of prasädam; mantra-hénam—with no chanting of the Vedic
hymns; adakñiëam—with no remunerations to the priests; çraddhä—faith;
virahitam—without; yajïam—sacrifice; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance;
paricakñate—is to be considered.
TRANSLATION
And that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in which
no spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and no remunerations are
made to the priests, and which is faithless—that sacrifice is of the nature of


--- Page 18 ---
18
ignorance.
PURPORT
Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend
the money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial
shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are all in the mode of
darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and do not benefit human
society.
TEXT 14
deviÜJaGauåPa[ajPaUJaNa& XaaEcMaaJaRvMa( )
b]øcYaRMaih&Saa c Xaarqr& TaPa oCYaTae )) 14 ))
deva-dvija-guru-präjïa-
püjanaà çaucam ärjavam
brahma-caryam ahiàsä ca
çäréraà tapa ucyate
deva—the Supreme Lord; dvija—the brähmaëa; guru—the spiritual master;
präjïa—worshipable personalities; püjanam—worship; çaucam—cleanliness;
ärjavam—simplicity; 
brahma-caryam—celibacy; 
ahiàsä—nonviolence;
ca—also; çäréram—pertaining to the body; tapaù—austerity; ucyate—is said to
be.
TRANSLATION
The austerity of the body consists in this: worship of the Supreme Lord, the
brähmaëas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother.


--- Page 19 ---
19
Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence are also austerities of the body.
PURPORT
The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body.
One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the
perfect, qualified brähmaëas and the spiritual master and superiors like father,
mother or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should
be given proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and
internally, and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do
anything which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunction. He should not
indulge in sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only
in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are penances and
austerities as far as the body is concerned.
TEXT 15
ANauÜeGak-r& vaKYa& SaTYa& iPa[YaihTa& c YaTa( )
SvaDYaaYaa>YaSaNa& cEv vax(MaYa& TaPa oCYaTae )) 15 ))
anudvega-karaà väkyaà
satyaà priya-hitaà ca yat
svädhyäyäbhyasanaà caiva
väìmayaà tapa ucyate
anudvega—not 
agitating; 
karam—producing; 
väkyam—words;
satyam—truthful; priya—dear; hitam—beneficial; ca—also; yat—which;
svädhyäya—Vedic study; abhyasanam—practice; ca—also; eva—certainly;
väìmayaà—of the voice; tapaù—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.


--- Page 20 ---
20
TRANSLATION
Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially and in
avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedas regularly.
PURPORT
One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of
course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his
students, but such a teacher should not speak to others who are not his
students if he will agitate their minds. This is penance as far as talking is
concerned. Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. When speaking in
spiritual circles, one's statements must be upheld by the scriptures. One should
at once quote from scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the
same time, such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions,
one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There is a
limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. This is called
penance of speech.
TEXT 16
MaNa"Pa[Saad" SaaEMYaTv& MaaENaMaaTMaiviNaGa]h" )
>aavSa&éuiÖirTYaeTataPaae MaaNaSaMauCYaTae )) 16 ))
manaù-prasädaù saumyatvaà
maunam ätma-vinigrahaù
bhäva-saàçuddhir ity etat
tapo mänasam ucyate
manaù-prasädaù—satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam—without duplicity
towards 
others; 
maunam—gravity; 
ätma—self; 
vinigrahaù—control;


--- Page 21 ---
21
bhäva—nature; 
saàçuddhiù—purification; 
iti—thus; 
etat—that 
is;
tapaù—austerity; mänasam—of the mind; ucyate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And serenity, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of thought are the
austerities of the mind.
PURPORT
To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It should
be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others. The best
training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from Kåñëa
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratification. To purify one's nature
is to become Kåñëa conscious. Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by
taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of
sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age
we unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense
gratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind's becoming satisfied.
The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of
satisfying stories, as in the Puräëas and the Mahäbhärata. One can take
advantage of this knowledge and thus become purified. The mind should be
devoid of duplicity, and one should think of the welfare of all. Silence means
that one is always thinking of self-realization. The person in Kåñëa
consciousness observes perfect silence in this sense. Control of the mind means
detaching the mind from sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward in
his dealing and thereby purify his existence. All these qualities together
constitute austerity in mental activities.
TEXT 17


--- Page 22 ---
22
é[ÖYaa ParYaa Taá& TaPaSTaiT}aivDa& NarE" )
Af-l/ak-ax(i+ai>aYauR¢E-" Saaitvk&- Pairc+aTae )) 17 ))
çraddhayä parayä taptaà
tapas tat tri-vidhaà naraiù
aphaläkäìkñibhir yuktaiù
sättvikaà paricakñate
çraddhayä—with 
faith; 
parayä—transcendental; 
taptam—executed;
tapaù—austerity; tat—that; tri-vidham—three kinds; naraiù—by men;
aphala-äkäìkñibhiù—without 
desires 
for 
fruits; 
yuktaiù—engaged;
sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; pari-cakñate—is called.
TRANSLATION(1)
This threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature of goodness.
TEXT 18
SaTk-arMaaNaPaUJaaQa| TaPaae dM>aeNa cEv YaTa( )
i§-YaTae Taidh Pa[ae¢&- raJaSa& cl/MaDa]uvMa( )) 18 ))
satkära-mäna-püjärthaà
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktaà
räjasaà calam adhruvam
satkära—respect; mäna—honor; püjä-artham—for worship; tapaù—austerity;
dambhena—with 
pride; 
ca—also; 
eva—certainly; 
yat—which 
is;
kriyate—performed; 
tat—that; 
iha—in 
this 
world; 
proktam—is said;


--- Page 23 ---
23
räjasam—in the mode of passion; calam—flickering; adhruvam—temporary.
TRANSLATION
Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in order to
gain respect, honor and reverence are said to be in the mode of passion. They
are neither stable nor permanent.
PURPORT
Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive
honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of passion arrange
to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer riches.
Such arrangements artificially made by the performance of penances are
considered to be in the mode of passion. The results are temporary; they can be
continued for some time, but they are not permanent.
TEXT 19
MaU!Ga]ahe<aaTMaNaae YaTPaq@Yaa i§-YaTae TaPa" )
ParSYaaeTSaadNaaQa| va TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 19 ))
müòha-gräheëätmano yat
péòayä kriyate tapaù
parasyotsädanärthaà vä
tat tämasam udähåtam
müòha—foolish; gräheëa—with endeavor; ätmanaù—of one's own self;
yat—which; péòayä—by torture; kriyate—is performed; tapaù—penance;
parasya—to others; utsädanärtham—causing annihilation; vä—or; tat—that;
tämasam—in the mode of darkness; udähåtam—is said to be.


--- Page 24 ---
24
TRANSLATION
And those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by means
of obstinant self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, are said to be in the
mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiraëyakaçipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill
the demigods. He prayed to Brahmä for such things, but ultimately he was
killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergo penances for
something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 20
daTaVYaiMaiTa YaÕaNa& dqYaTae_NauPak-air<ae )
deXae k-ale/ c Paa}ae c TaÕaNa& Saaitvk&- SMa*TaMa( )) 20 ))
dätavyam iti yad dänaà
déyate 'nupakäriëe
deçe käle ca pätre ca
tad dänaà sättvikaà småtam
dätavyam—worth giving; iti—thus; yat—that which; dänam—charity;
déyate—given; anupakäriëe—to any person irrespective of doing good;
dese—in place; käle—in time; ca—also; pätre—suitable person; ca—and;
tat—that; 
dänam—charity; 
sättvikam—in 
the 
mode 
of 
goodness;
småtam—consider.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 25 ---
25
That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a
worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be charity in
the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving charity
indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always a consideration. Therefore
charity is recommended to be given at a place of pilgrimage and at lunar or
solar eclipses or at the end of the month or to a qualified brähmaëa or a
Vaiñëava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should be given without any
consideration of return. Charity to the poor is sometimes given out of
compassion, but if a poor man is not worth giving charity to, then there is no
spiritual advancement. In other words, indiscriminate charity is not
recommended in the Vedic literature.
TEXT 21
Yatau Pa[TYauPak-araQa| f-l/MauiÕXYa va PauNa" )
dqYaTae c Pairi(c)-í& TaÕaNa& raJaSa& SMa*TaMa( )) 21 ))
yat tu pratyupakärärthaà
phalam uddiçya vä punaù
déyate ca parikliñöaà
tad dänaà räjasaà småtam
yat—that which; tu—but; prati-upakära-artham—for the sake of getting some
return; phalam—result; uddiçya—desiring; vä—or; punaù—again; déyate—is
given 
in 
charity; 
ca—also; 
parikliñöam—grudgingly; 
tat—that;
dänam—charity; räjasam—in the mode of passion; småtam—is understood to


--- Page 26 ---
26
be.
TRANSLATION
But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire
for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of
passion.
PURPORT
Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and
sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. "Why have I
spent so much in this way?" Charity is also sometimes made under some
obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds of charity are said to be
made in the mode of passion.
There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to
institutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not
recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended.
TEXT 22
AdeXak-ale/ YaÕaNaMaPaa}ae>Yaê dqYaTae )
ASaTk*-TaMavjaTa& TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 22 ))
adeça-käle yad dänam
apätrebhyaç ca déyate
asat-kåtam avajïätaà
tat tämasam udähåtam
adesa—unpurified place; käle—unpurified time; yat—that which is;


--- Page 27 ---
27
dänam—charity; apätrebhyaù—to unworthy persons; ca—also; déyate—is
given; asatkåtam—without respect; avajïätam—without proper attention;
tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of darkness; udähåtam—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And charity performed at an improper place and time and given to unworthy
persons without respect and with contempt is charity in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such
charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged. Similarly, if a
person gives charity to a suitable person without respect and without attention,
that sort of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 23
p TaTSaidiTa iNadeRXaae b]ø<aiñivDa" SMa*Ta" )
b]aø<aaSTaeNa vedaê Yajaê ivihTaa" Paura )) 23 ))
oà-tat-sad iti nirdeço
brahmaëas tri-vidhaù småtaù
brähmaëäs tena vedäç ca
yajïäç ca vihitäù purä
om—indication 
of 
the 
Supreme; 
tat—that; 
sat—eternal; 
iti—that;
nirdeçaù—indication; brähmaëäù—of the Supreme; tri-vidhaù—three kinds;
småtaù—consider; brahmaëaù—the brähmaëas; tena—therefore; vedäù—the
Vedic literature; ca—also; yajïäù—sacrifice; ca—also; vihitäù—sacrifice;


--- Page 28 ---
28
purä—formerly.
TRANSLATION
From the beginning of creation, the three syllables—om tat sat—have been
used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were uttered by
brähmaëas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices, for the
satisfaction of the Supreme.
PURPORT
It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided
into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. But
whether first class, second class or third class, they are all conditioned,
contaminated by the material modes of nature. When they are aimed at the
Supreme—om tat sat, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal—they
become means for spiritual elevation. In the scriptural injunctions such an
objective is indicated. These three words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the
Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the
word om is always found.
One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not
attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the
ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance of charities,
sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the
modes of passion or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three
words om tat sat are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme
Lord, e.g., om tad viñëoù. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the
Supreme Lord is uttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature.
These three words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmaëo
nediñöaà näma indicates(2) the first goal. Then tattvamasi indicates the second
goal. And sad eva saumya indicates(3) the third goal. Combined they become


--- Page 29 ---
29
om tat sat. Formerly when Brahmä, the first created living entity, performed
sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The same principle holds by disciplic succession. So this hymn has great
significance. Bhagavad-gétä recommends, therefore, that any work done should
be done for om tat sat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one
performs penance, charity, and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting in
Krñna consciousness. Kåñëa consciousness is a scientific execution of
transcendental activities which enables one to return home, back to Godhead.
There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendental way.
TEXT 24
TaSMaad( p wTYaudaôTYa YajdaNaTaPa"i§-Yaa" )
Pa[vTaRNTae ivDaaNaae¢-a" SaTaTa& b]øvaidNaaMa( )) 24 ))
tasmäd oà ity udähåtya
yajïa-däna-tapaù-kriyäù
pravartante vidhänoktäù
satataà brahma-vädinäm
tasmät—therefore; om—beginning with om; iti—thus; udähåtya—indicating;
yajïa—sacrifice; däna—charity; tapaù—penance; kriyäù—performances;
pravartante—begins; vidhäna-uktäù—according to scriptural regulation;
satatam—always; brahma-vädinäm—of the transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and penances,
beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.
PURPORT


--- Page 30 ---
30
Om tad viñëoù paramaà padam. The lotus feet of Viñëu are the supreme
devotional platform. The performance of everything on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.
TEXT 25
TaidTYaNai>aSaNDaaYa f-l&/ YajTaPa"i§-Yaa" )
daNai§-Yaaê ivivDaa" i§-YaNTae Maae+ak-ax(i+ai>a" )) 25 ))
tad ity anabhisandhäya
phalaà yajïa-tapaù-kriyäù
däna-kriyäç ca vividhäù
kriyante mokña-käìkñibhiù
tat—that; iti—they; anabhisandhäya—without fruitive result; phalam—result
of 
sacrifice; 
yajïa—sacrifice; 
tapaù—penance; 
kriyäù—activities;
däna—charity; 
kriyäù—activities; 
ca—also; 
vividhäù—varieties;
kriyante—done; mokña-käìkñibhiù—those who actually desire liberation.
TRANSLATION
One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The
purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from the material
entanglement.
PURPORT
To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material
gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to the
spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.


--- Page 31 ---
31
TEXTS 26-27
SaÙave SaaDau>aave c SaidTYaeTaTPa[YauJYaTae )
Pa[XaSTae k-MaRi<a TaQaa SaC^Bd" PaaQaR YauJYaTae )) 26 ))
Yaje TaPaiSa daNae c iSQaiTa" SaidiTa caeCYaTae )
k-MaR cEv TadQasYa& SaidTYaevai>aDaqYaTae )) 27 ))
sad-bhäve sädhu-bhäve ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
praçaste karmaëi tathä
sac-chabdaù pärtha yujyate
yajïe tapasi däne ca
sthitiù sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthéyaà
sad ity eväbhidhéyate
sat-bhäve—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sädhu-bhäve—in the
sense of the nature of devotion; ca—also; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus;
etat—this; prayujyate—is used; praçaste—bona fide; karmaëi—activities;
tathä—also; sat-çabdaù—sound; pärtha—O son of Påthä; yujyate—is used;
yajïe—sacrifice; 
tapasi—in 
penance; 
däne—charity; 
ca—also;
sthitiù—situated; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—pronounced;
karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—that; arthéyam—are meant;
sat—Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly; abhidhéyate—is practiced.
TRANSLATION
The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and of charity,
true to the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son


--- Page 32 ---
32
of Påthä.
PURPORT
The words praçaste karmaëi, or prescribed duties, indicate that there are
many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory
processes beginning from parental care up to the end of one's life. Such
purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living
entity. In all such activities it is recommended that one should vibrate om tat
sat. The words sad-bhäve and sädhu-bhäve indicate the transcendental
situation. One who is acting in Kåñëa consciousness is called sattva, and one
who is fully conscious of activities in Kåñëa consciousness is called svarüpa. In
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that the transcendental subject matter
becomes clear in the association of the devotees. Without good association, one
cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or
offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words om tat sat. Similarly, in all
kinds of yogic performances, the supreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These
words om tat sat are used to perfect all activities. This supreme om tat sat makes
everything complete.
TEXT 28
Aé[ÖYaa huTa& dta& TaPaSTaá& k*-Ta& c YaTa( )
ASaidTYauCYaTae PaaQaR Na c TaTPa[eTYa Naae wh )) 28 ))
açraddhayä hutaà dattaà
tapas taptaà kåtaà ca yat
asad ity ucyate pärtha
na ca tat pretya no iha
açraddhayä—without 
faith; 
hutam—performed; 
dattam—given;


--- Page 33 ---
33
tapaù—penance; taptam—executed; kåtam—performed; ca—also; yat—that
which; asat—falls; iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
na—never; ca—also; tat—that; pretya—after death; no—nor; iha—in this life.
TRANSLATION
But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in the
Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Påthä, regardless of whatever rites are
performed. They are called asat and are useless both in this life and the next.
PURPORT
Anything done without the transcendental objective—whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance—is useless. Therefore, in this verse, it is declared
that such activities are abominable. Everything should be done for the
Supreme in Kåñëa consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper
guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the
Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is
the understanding of Kåñëa. No one can obtain success without following this
principle. Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in
Kåñëa consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is
the way to make everything successful.
In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods, ghosts, or
Yakñas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes of passion
and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Kåñëa consciousness is
transcendental to all three modes of material nature. Although there is a
process of gradual elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes
directly to Kåñëa consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended
in this chapter. To achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper
spiritual master and receive training under his direction. Then one can
achieve faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is


--- Page 34 ---
34
called love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the living entities. One
should, therefore, take to Krñëa consciousness directly. That is the message of
this Seventeenth Chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.


--- Page 35 ---
35
Endnotes
1 (Popup - Popup)
760701BJ.NV
2 (Popup - Popup)
The çruti says om ity etad brahmaëo nediñöaà näma: Om is another name of
the brahman. (Åg veda)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 17.24]
note: The mantra quoted here cannot be found in the Rig Veda. Also cited
in the Bhagavat-sandarbha by Jiva Gosvämé, where simply cited as çruti.
3 (Popup - Popup)
In the Chändogya Upaniñad (6.2.1) it is said:
sad eva saumyedam agra äséd ekam evädvitéyaà brahma
  sat—the Supreme; eva—indeed; saumya—O gentle one; idam—this;
agre—before; äsét—was; ekam—one; eva—indeed; advitéyam—without a rival;
brahma—the Supreme;
"O gentle one, in the beginning only the Supreme existed. There was none
but Him." 
[Jéva Gosvämé, Paramätma-sandarbha 105.92] 
