--- Page 1 ---
1


--- Page 2 ---
2
1. Observing the Armies on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra
TEXT 1
Da*Taraí\ ovac
DaMaR+ae}ae ku-å+ae}ae SaMaveTaa YauYauTSav" )
MaaMak-a" Paa<@vaêEv ik-Maku-vRTa SaÅYa )) 1 ))
dhåtaräñöra uväca
dharma-kñetre kuru-kñetre
samavetä yuyutsavaù
mämakäù päëòaväç caiva
kim akurvata saïjaya
dhåtaräñöraù—King Dhåtaräñöra; uväca—said; dharma-kñetre—in the place of
pilgrimage; 
kuru-kñetre—in 
the 
place 
named 
Kurukñetra;
samavetäù—assembled; yuyatsavaù—desiring to fight; mämakäù—my party
(sons); päëòaväù—the sons of Päëòu; ca—and; eva-certainly; kim—what;
akurvata—did they do; saïjaya—O Saïjaya.
TRANSLATION
Dhåtaräñöra said: O Saïjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at
Kurukñetra, what did my sons and the sons of Päëòu do, being desirous to fight?


--- Page 3 ---
3
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gétä is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gétä-mähätmya (Glorification of the Gétä). There it says that one should read
Bhagavad-gétä very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of
Çré Kåñëa and try to understand it without personally motivated
interpretations. The example of clear understanding is there in the
Bhagavad-gétä itself, in the way the teaching is understood by Arjuna, who
heard the Gétä directly from the Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to
understand Bhagavad-gétä in that line of disciplic succession, without
motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all
scriptures of the world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gétä all that is contained
in other scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not to be
found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gétä. It is the perfect
theistic science because it is directly spoken by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa.
The topics discussed by Dhåtaräñöra and Saïjaya, as described in the
Mahäbhärata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It is
understood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra,
which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial time of the Vedic
age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was present personally on this planet
for the guidance of mankind.
The word dharma-kñetra (a place where religious rituals are performed) is
significant because, on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhåtaräñöra, the father of the
Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of his sons' ultimate victory. In
his doubt, he inquired from his secretary Saïjaya, "What did my sons and the
sons of Päëòu do?" He was confident that both his sons and the sons of his
younger brother Päëòu were assembled in that Field of Kurukñetra for a
determined engagement of the war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not


--- Page 4 ---
4
want a compromise between the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be
sure of the fate of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged
to be fought at Kurukñetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as a
place of worship—even for the denizens of heaven—Dhåtaräñöra became very
fearful about the influence of the holy place on the outcome of the battle. He
knew very well that this would influence Arjuna and the sons of Päëòu
favorably, because by nature they were all virtuous. Saïjaya was a student of
Vyäsa, and therefore, by the mercy of Vyäsa, Saïjaya was able to envision the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra even while he was in the room of Dhåtaräñöra. And
so, Dhåtaräñöra asked him about the situation on the battlefield.
Both the Päëòavas and the sons of Dhåtaräñöra belong to the same family,
but Dhåtaräñöra's mind is disclosed herein. He deliberately claimed only his
sons as Kurus, and he separated the sons of Päëòu from the family heritage.
One can thus understand the specific position of Dhåtaräñöra in his
relationship with his nephews, the sons of Päëòu. As in the paddy field the
unnecessary plants are taken out, so it is expected from the very beginning of
these topics that in the religious field of Kurukñetra where the father of
religion, Çré Kåñëa, was present, the unwanted plants like Dhåtaräñöra's son
Duryodhana and others would be wiped out and the thoroughly religious
persons, headed by Yudhiñöhira, would be established by the Lord. This is the
significance of the words dharma-kñetre and kuru-kñetre, apart from their
historical and Vedic importance.
TEXT 2
SaÅYa ovac
d*îa Tau Paa<@vaNaqk&- VYaU!& duYaaeRDaNaSTada )
AacaYaRMauPaSa(r)MYa raJaa vcNaMab]vqTa( )) 2 ))
saïjaya uväca


--- Page 5 ---
5
dåñövä tu päëòavänékaà
vyüòhaà duryodhanas tadä
äcäryam upasaìgamya
räjä vacanam abravét
saïjayaù—Saïjaya; 
uväca—said; 
dåñövä—after 
seeing; 
tu—but;
päëòava-anékam—the soldiers of the Päëòavas; vyüòham—arranged in
military phalanx; duryodhanaù—King Duryodhana; tadä—at that time;
äcäryam—the teacher; upasaìgamya—approaching nearby; räjä—the king;
vacanam—words; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons of
Päëòu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak the following
words:
PURPORT
Dhåtaräñöra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of
spiritual vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind in the
matter of religion, and he was sure that they could never reach an
understanding with the Päëòavas, who were all pious since birth. Still he was
doubtful about the influence of the place of pilgrimage, and Saïjaya could
understand his motive in asking about the situation on the battlefield. He
wanted, therefore, to encourage the despondent King, and thus he warned him
that his sons were not going to make any sort of compromise under the
influence of the holy place. Saïjaya therefore informed the King that his son,
Duryodhana, after seeing the military force of the Päëòavas, at once went to
the commander-in-chief, Droëäcärya, to inform him of the real position.
Although Duryodhana is mentioned as the king, he still had to go to the
commander on account of the seriousness of the situation. He was therefore


--- Page 6 ---
6
quite fit to be a politician. But Duryodhana's diplomatic veneer could not
disguise the fear he felt when he saw the military arrangement of the
Päëòavas.


--- Page 7 ---
7


--- Page 8 ---
8
TEXT 3
PaXYaETaa& Paa<@uPau}aa<aaMaacaYaR MahTaq& cMaUMa( )
VYaU!a& d]uPadPau}ae<a Tav iXaZYae<a DaqMaTaa )) 3 ))
paçyaitäà päëòu-puträëäm
äcärya mahatéà camüm
vyüòhäà drupada-putreëa
tava çiñyeëa dhématä
paçya—behold; etäm—this; päëòu-puträëäm—of the sons of Päëòu;
äcärya—O 
teacher; 
mahatém—great; 
camüm—military 
force;
vyuòham—arranged; drupada-putreëa—by the son of Drupada; tava—your;
çiñyeëa—disciple; dhématä—very intelligent.
TRANSLATION
O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Päëòu, so expertly
arranged by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.
PURPORT
Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of
Droëäcärya, the great brähmaëa commander-in-chief. Droëäcärya had some
political quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadé, who was Arjuna's
wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which
he received the benediction of having a son who would be able to kill
Droëäcärya. Droëäcärya knew this perfectly well, and yet, as a liberal
brähmaëa, he did not hesitate to impart all his military secrets when the son of
Drupada, Dhåñöadyumna, was entrusted to him for military education. Now, on
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, Dhåñöadyumna took the side of the Päëòavas,
and it was he who arranged for their military phalanx, after having learned the


--- Page 9 ---
9
art from Droëäcärya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Droëäcärya's so
that he might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted
to point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battle against the
Päëòavas, who were also Droëäcärya's affectionate students. Arjuna,
especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student. Duryodhana also
warned that such leniency in the fight would lead to defeat.
TEXT 4
A}a éUra MaheZvaSaa >aqMaaJauRNaSaMaa YauiDa )
YauYauDaaNaae ivra$=ê d]uPadê MaharQa" )) 4 ))
atra çürä maheñväsä
bhémärjuna-samä yudhi
yuyudhäno viräöaç ca
drupadaç ca mahä-rathaù
atra—here; 
çüräù—heroes; 
maheñväsäù—mighty 
bowmen;
bhéma-arjuna—Bhéma and Arjuna; samäù—equal; yudhi—in the fight;
yuyudhänaù—Yuyudhäna; viräöaù—Viräöa; ca—also; drupadaù—Drupada;
ca—also; mahärathaù—great fighter.
TRANSLATION
Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhéma
and Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhäna, Viräöa and Drupada.
PURPORT
Even though Dhåñöadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face of
Droëäcärya's very great power in the military art, there were many others who
were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana as great stumbling


--- Page 10 ---
10
blocks on the path of victory because each and every one of them was as
formidable as Bhéma and Arjuna. He knew the strength of Bhéma and Arjuna,
and thus he compared the others with them.
TEXT 5
Da*íke-Tauêeik-TaaNa" k-aiXaraJaê vqYaRvaNa( )
PauåiJaTku-iNTa>aaeJaê XaEBYaê NarPau(r)v" )) 5 ))
dhåñöaketuç cekitänaù
käçiräjaç ca véryavän
purujit kuntibhojaç ca
çaibyaç ca nara-puìgavaù
dhåñöaketuù—Dhåñöaketu; cekitänaù—Cekitäna; käçiräjaù—Kaçiräja; ca—also;
véryavän—very powerful; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojaù—Kuntibhoja; ca—and;
çaibyaù—Çaibya; ca—and; nara-puìgavaù—heroes in human society.
TRANSLATION
There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhåñöaketu, Cekitäna,
Käçiräja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Çaibya.
TEXT 6
YauDaaMaNYauê iv§-aNTa otaMaaEJaaê vqYaRvaNa( )
SaaE>ad]ae d]aEPadeYaaê SavR Wv MaharQaa" )) 6 ))
yudhämanyuç ca vikränta
uttamaujäç ca véryavän


--- Page 11 ---
11
saubhadro draupadeyäç ca
sarva eva mahä-rathäù
yudhämanyuù—Yudhämanyu; 
ca—and; 
vikräntaù—mighty;
uttamaujäù—Uttamaujä; ca—and; véryavän—very powerful; saubhadraù—the
son of Subhadrä; draupadeyäù—the sons of Draupadé; ca—and; sarve—all;
eva—certainly; mahä-rathäù—great chariot fighters.
TRANSLATION
There are the mighty Yudhämanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujä, the son of
Subhadrä and the sons of Draupadé. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.
TEXT 7
ASMaak&- Tau iviXaía Yae TaaiàbaeDa iÜJaaetaMa )
NaaYak-a MaMa SaENYaSYa Sa&jaQa| TaaNb]vqiMa Tae )) 7 ))
asmäkaà tu viçiñöä ye
tän nibodha dvijottama
näyakä mama sainyasya
saàjïärthaà tän bravémi te
asmäkam—our; tu—but; viçiñöäù—especially powerful; ye—those; tän—them;
nibodha—just take note, be informed; dvijottama—the best of the brähmaëas;
näyakäù—captains; 
mama—my; 
sainyasya—of 
the 
soldiers;
saàjïä-artham—for information; tän—them; bravémi—I am speaking;
te—your.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, for your information, let me tell you about the


--- Page 12 ---
12
captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.
TEXT 8
>avaN>aqZMaê k-<aRê k*-Paê SaiMaiTa&JaYa" )
AìTQaaMaa ivk-<aRê SaaEMaditaSTaQaEv c )) 8 ))
bhavän bhéñmaç ca karëaç ca
kåpaç ca samitiïjayaù
açvatthämä vikarëaç ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca
bhavän—yourself; bhéñmaù—Grandfather Bhéñma; ca—also; karëaù—Karëa;
ca—and; kåpaù—Kåpa; ca—and; samitiïjayaù—always victorious in battle;
açvatthämä—Açvatthämä; 
vikarëaù—Vikarëa; 
ca—as 
well 
as;
saumadattiù—the son of Somadatta; tathä—and as; eva—certainly; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
There are personalities like yourself, Bhéñma, Karëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä,
Vikarëa and the son of Somadatta called Bhuriçravä, who are always victorious
in battle.
PURPORT
Duryodhana mentioned the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom
are ever-victorious. Vikarëa is the brother of Duryodhana, Açvatthämä is the
son of Droëäcärya, and Saumadatti, or Bhüriçravä, is the son of the King of the
Bählékas. Karëa is the half brother of Arjuna, as he was born of Kunté before
her marriage with King Päëòu. Kåpäcärya married the twin sister of
Droëäcärya.


--- Page 13 ---
13
TEXT 9
ANYae c bhv" éUra MadQaeR TYa¢-JaqivTaa" )
NaaNaaXañPa[hr<aa" SaveR YauÖivXaarda" )) 9 ))
anye ca bahavaù çürä
mad-arthe tyakta-jévitäù
nänä-çastra-praharaëäù
sarve yuddha-viçäradäù
anye—many others; ca—also; bahavaù—in great numbers; çüräù—heroes;
mad-arthe—for my sake; tyakta-jévitäù—prepared to risk life; nänä—many;
çastra-weapons; 
praharaëäù—equipped 
with; 
sarve—all 
of 
them;
yuddha—battle; viçäradäù—experienced in military science.
TRANSLATION
There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my
sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are
experienced in military science.
PURPORT
As far as the others are concerned—like Jayadratha, Kåtavarmä, Çalya,
etc.—all are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana's sake. In other
words, it is already concluded that all of them would die in the Battle of
Kurukñetra for joining the party of the sinful Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of
course, confident of his victory on account of the above-mentioned combined
strength of his friends.


--- Page 14 ---
14
TEXT 10
APaYaaRá& TadSMaak&- bl&/ >aqZMaai>ari+aTaMa( )
PaYaaRá& iTvdMaeTaeza& bl&/ >aqMaai>ari+aTaMa( )) 10 ))
aparyäptaà tad asmäkaà
balaà bhéñmäbhirakñitam
paryäptaà tv idam eteñäà
balaà bhémäbhirakñitam
aparyäptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asmäkam—of ours; balam—strength;
bhéñma—by 
Grandfather 
Bhéñma; 
abhirakñitam—perfectly 
protected;
paryäptam—limited; tu—but; idam—all these; eteñäm—of the Päëòavas;
balam—strength; bhéma—by Bhéma; abhirakñitam—carefully protected.
TRANSLATION
Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather
Bhéñma, whereas the strength of the Päëòavas, carefully protected by Bhéma, is
limited.
PURPORT
Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being specifically
protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather Bhéñma. On the other
hand, the forces of the Päëòavas are limited, being protected by a less
experienced general, Bhéma, who is like a fig in the presence of Bhéñma.
Duryodhana was always envious of Bhéma because he knew perfectly well that
if he should die at all, he would only be killed by Bhéma. But at the same time,
he was confident of his victory on account of the presence of Bhéñma, who was
a far superior general. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle


--- Page 15 ---
15
victorious was well ascertained.
TEXT 11
AYaNaezu c SaveRzu YaQaa>aaGaMaviSQaTaa" )
>aqZMaMaevai>ar+aNTau >avNTa" SavR Wv ih )) 11 ))
ayaneñu ca sarveñu
yathä-bhägam avasthitäù
bhéñmam eväbhirakñantu
bhavantaù sarva eva hi
ayaneñu—in 
the 
strategic 
points; 
ca—also; 
sarveñu—everywhere;
yathäbhägam—as 
they 
are 
differently 
arranged; 
avasthitäù—situated;
bhéñmam—unto Grandfather Bhéñma; eva—certainly; abhirakñantu—support
may be given; bhavantaù—all of you; sarve—respectively; eva—certainly;
hi—and exactly.
TRANSLATION
Now all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhéñma, standing at
your respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.
PURPORT
Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhéñma, further considered that
others might think that they had been considered less important, so in his
usual diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in the above words. He
emphasized that Bhéñmadeva was undoubtedly the greatest hero, but he was an
old man, so everyone must especially think of his protection from all sides. He
might become engaged in the fight, and the enemy might take advantage of his
full engagement on one side. Therefore, it was important that other heroes


--- Page 16 ---
16
would not leave their strategic positions and allow the enemy to break the
phalanx. Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on
the presence of Bhéñmadeva. He was confident of the full support of
Bhéñmadeva and Droëäcärya in the battle because he well knew that they did
not even speak a word when Arjuna's wife Draupadé, in her helpless condition,
had appealed to them for justice while she was being forced to strip naked in
the presence of all the great generals in the assembly. Although he knew that
the two generals had some sort of affection for the Päëòavas, he hoped that all
such affection would now be completely given up by them, as was customary
during the gambling performances.
TEXT 12
TaSYa SaÅNaYaNhz| ku-åv*Ö" iPaTaaMah" )
iSa&hNaad& ivNaÛaeÀE" Xa«& dDMaaE Pa[TaaPavaNa( )) 12 ))
tasya saïjanayan harñaà
kuru-våddhaù pitämahaù
siàha-nädaà vinadyoccaiù
çaìkhaà dadhmau pratäpavän
tasya—his; 
saïjanayan—increasing; 
harñam—cheerfulness;
kuru-våddhaù—the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhéñma); pitämahaù—the
grandfather; siàha-nädam—roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya—vibrating;
uccaiù—very loudly; çaìkham—conchshell; dadhmau—blew; pratäpavän—the
valiant.
TRANSLATION
Then Bhéñma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the
grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly like the sound of a


--- Page 17 ---
17
lion, giving Duryodhana joy.
PURPORT
The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion for
him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly, befitting his
position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the conchshell, he informed
his depressed grandson Duryodhana that he had no chance of victory in the
battle, because the Supreme Lord Kåñëa was on the other side. But still, it was
his duty to conduct the fight, and no pains would be spared in that connection.
TEXT 13
TaTa" Xa«aê >aeYaRê Pa<avaNak-GaaeMau%a" )
SahSaEva>YahNYaNTa Sa XaBdSTauMaul/ae_>avTa( )) 13 ))
tataù çaìkhäç ca bheryaç ca
paëavänaka-gomukhäù
sahasaiväbhyahanyanta
sa çabdas tumulo 'bhavat
tataù—thereafter; çaìkhäù—conchshells; ca—also; bheryaù—bugles; ca—and;
paëava-änaka—trumpets and drums; go-mukhäù—horns; sahasä—all of a
sudden; eva—certainly; abhyahanyanta—being simultaneously sounded;
saù—that; 
çabdaù—combined 
sound; 
tumulaù—tumultuous;
abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
After that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all


--- Page 18 ---
18
suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.
TEXT 14
TaTa" ìeTaEhRYaEYauR¢e- MahiTa SYaNdNae iSQaTaaE )
MaaDav" Paa<@vêEv idVYaaE Xa«aE Pa[dDMaTau" )) 14 ))
tataù çvetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
mädhavaù päëòavaç caiva
divyau çaìkhau pradadhmatuù
tataù—thereafter; çvetaiù—by white; hayaiù—horses; yukte—being yoked
with; mahati—in the great; syandane—chariot; sthitau—so situated;
mädhavaù—Kåñëa (the husband of the goddess of fortune); päëòavaù—Arjuna
(the son of Päëòu); ca—also; eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental;
çaìkhau—conchshells; pradadhmatuù—sounded.
TRANSLATION
On the other side, both Lord Kåñëa and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot
drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.
PURPORT
In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhéñmadeva, the conchshells in
the hands of Kåñëa and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The sounding
of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of victory
for the other side because Kåñëa was on the side of the Päëòavas. Jayas tu
päëòu-puträëäà yeñäà pakñe janärdanaù. Victory is always with persons like
the sons of Päëòu because Lord Kåñëa is associated with them. And whenever
and wherever the Lord is present, the goddess of fortune is also there because


--- Page 19 ---
19
the goddess of fortune never lives alone without her husband. Therefore,
victory and fortune were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental
sound produced by the conchshell of Viñëu, or Lord Kåñëa. Besides that, the
chariot on which both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the
fire-god) to Arjuna, and this indicated that this chariot was capable of
conquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.


--- Page 20 ---
20


--- Page 21 ---
21
TEXT 15
PaaÄJaNYa& ôzqke-Xaae devdta& DaNaÅYa" )
PaaE<@\& dDMaaE MahaXa«& >aqMak-MaaR v*k-aedr" )) 15 ))
päïcajanyaà håñékeço
devadattaà dhanaïjayaù
pauëòraà dadhmau mahä-çaìkhaà
bhéma-karmä våkodaraù
päïcajanyam—the conchshell named Päïcajanya; håñékeçaù—Håñékeça (Kåñëa,
the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the conchshell
named Devadatta; dhanaïjayaù—Dhanaïjaya (Arjuna, the winner of wealth);
pauëòram—the 
conch 
named 
Pauëòram; 
dadhmau—blew;
mahä-çaìkham—the terrific conchshell; bhéma-karmä—one who performs
Herculean tasks; våkodaraù—the voracious eater (Bhéma).
TRANSLATION
Then, Lord Kåñëa blew His conchshell, called Päïcajanya; Arjuna blew his,
the Devadatta; and Bhéma, the voracious eater and performer of Herculean
tasks, blew his terrific conchshell called Pauëòram.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is referred to as Håñékeça in this verse because He is the owner of
all senses The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and, therefore, the
senses of the living entities are also part and parcel of His senses. The
impersonalists cannot account for the senses of the living entities, and
therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as sense-less, or
impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their
senses. But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and in the


--- Page 22 ---
22
case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses of Arjuna,
and thus His particular name of Håñékeça. The Lord has different names
according to His different activities. For example, His name is Madhusüdana
because He killed the demon of the name Madhu; His name is Govinda because
He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Väsudeva because
He appeared as the son of Vasudeva; His name is Devaké-nandana because He
accepted Devaké as His mother; His name is Yaçodä-nandana because He
awarded His childhood pastimes to Yaçodä at Våndävana; His name is
Pärtha-särathi because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly,
His name is Håñékeça because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra.
Arjuna is referred to as Dhanaïjaya in this verse because he helped his
elder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the King to make
expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhéma is known as Våkodara
because he could eat as voraciously as he could perform Herculean tasks, such
as killing the demon Hiòimba. So, the particular types of conchshell blown by
the different personalities on the side of the Päëòavas, beginning with the
Lord's, were all very encouraging to the fighting soldiers. On the other side
there were no such credits, nor the presence of Lord Kåñëa, the supreme
director, nor that of the goddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose
the battle—and that was the message announced by the sounds of the
conchshells.
TEXTS 16-18
ANaNTaivJaYa& raJaa ku-NTaqPau}aae YauiDaiïr" )
Naku-l/" Sahdevê SaugaaezMai<aPauZPak-aE )) 16 ))
k-aXYaê ParMaeZvaSa" iXa%<@q c MaharQa" )


--- Page 23 ---
23
Da*íÛuManae ivra$=ê SaaTYaik-êaParaiJaTa" )) 17 ))
d]uPadae d]aEPadeYaaê SavRXa" Pa*iQavqPaTae )
SaaE>ad]ê Mahabahu" Xa«aNdDMau" Pa*QaKPa*Qak(- )) 18 ))
anantavijayaà räjä
kunté-putro yudhiñöhiraù
nakulaù sahadevaç ca
sughoña-maëipuñpakau
käçyaç ca parameñväsaù
çikhaëòé ca mahä-rathaù
dhåñöadyumno viräöaç ca
sätyakiç cäparäjitaù
drupado draupadeyäç ca
sarvaçaù påthivé-pate
saubhadraç ca mahä-bähuù
çaìkhän dadhmuù påthak påthak
ananta-vijayam—the 
conch 
named 
Ananta-vijaya; 
räjä—the 
king;
kunté-putraù—the son of Kunté; yudhiñöhiraù—Yudhiñöhira; nakulaù—Nakula;
sahadevaù—Sahadeva; ca—and; sughoña-maëipuñpakau—the conches named
Sughoña and Maëipuñpaka; käçyaù—the King of Käçé (Väräëasé); ca—and;
parama-iñu-äsaù—the 
great 
archer; 
çikhaëòé—Çikhaëòé; 
ca—also;
mahä-rathaù—one 
who 
can 
fight 
alone 
against 
thousands;
dhåñöadyumnaù—Dhåñöadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viräöaù—Viräöa
(the prince who gave shelter to the Päëòavas while they were in disguise);
ca—also; sätyakiù—Sätyaki (the same as Yuyudhäna, the charioteer of Lord
Kåñëa); 
ca—and; 
aparäjitaù—who 
had 
never 
been 
vanquished;
drupadaù—Drupada, the King of Päïcäla; draupadeyäù—the sons of Draupadé;
ca—also; sarvaçaù—all; påthivé-pate—O King; saubhadraù—Abhimanyu, the
son 
of 
Subhadrä; 
ca—also; 
mahä-bähuù—mighty-armed;


--- Page 24 ---
24
çaìkhän—conchshells; dadhmuù—blew; påthak påthak—each separately.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhiñöhira, the son of Kunté, blew his conchshell, the Anantavijaya,
and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughoña and Maëipuñpaka. That great
archer the King of Käçé, the great fighter Çikhaëòé, Dhåñöadyumna, Viräöa and
the unconquerable Sätyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadé, and the others, O
King, such as the son of Subhadrä, greatly armed, all blew their respective
conchshells.
PURPORT
Saïjaya informed King Dhåtaräñöra very tactfully that his unwise policy of
deceiving the sons of Päëòu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons on the
seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already clearly indicated
that the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in that great battle. Beginning
with the grandsire, Bhéñma, down to the grandsons like Abhimanyu and
others—including kings from many states of the world—all were present there,
and all were doomed. The whole catastrophe was due to King Dhåtaräñöra,
because he encouraged the policy followed by his sons.
TEXT 19
Sa gaaezae DaaTaRraí\a<aa& ôdYaaiNa VYadarYaTa( )
Na>aê Pa*iQavq& cEv TauMaul/ae_>YaNauNaadYaNa( )) 19 ))
sa ghoño dhärtaräñöräëäà
hådayäni vyadärayat
nabhaç ca påthivéà caiva
tumulo 'bhyanunädayan


--- Page 25 ---
25
saù—that; ghoñaù—vibration; dhärtaräñöräëäm—of the sons of Dhåtaräñöra;
hådayäni—hearts; 
vyadärayat—shattered; 
nabhaù—the 
sky; 
ca—also;
påthivém—the 
surface 
of 
the 
earth; 
ca—also; 
eva—certainly;
tumulaù—uproarious; abhyanunädayan—by resounding.
TRANSLATION
The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons of
Dhåtaräñöra.
PURPORT
When Bhéñma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their
respective conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of the
Päëòavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular verse it is
mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhåtaräñöra were shattered by the
sounds vibrated by the Päëòavas' party. This is due to the Päëòavas and their
confidence in Lord Kåñëa. One who takes shelter of the Supreme Lord has
nothing to fear, even in the midst of the greatest calamity.
TEXT 20
AQa VYaviSQaTaaNd*îa DaaTaRraí\aNk-iPaßJa" )
Pa[v*tae XañSaMPaaTae DaNauåÛMYa Paa<@v" )
ôzqke-Xa& Tada vaKYaiMadMaah MahqPaTae )) 20 ))
atha vyavasthitän dåñövä
dhärtaräñörän kapi-dhvajaù
pravåtte çastra-sampäte


--- Page 26 ---
26
dhanur udyamya päëòavaù
håñékeçaà tadä väkyam
idam äha mahé-pate
atha—thereupon; 
vyavasthitän—situated; 
dåñövä—looking 
on;
dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; kapi-dhvajaù—one whose flag is
marked 
with 
Hanumän; 
pravåtte—while 
about 
to 
be 
engaged;
çastra-sampäte—the arrows released; dhanuù—bow; udyamya—after taking up;
päëòavaù—the son of Päëòu (Arjuna); håñékeçam—unto Lord Kåñëa; tadä—at
that time; väkyam—words; idam—these; äha—said; mahé-pate—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Päëòu, who was seated in his chariot,
his flag marked with Hanumän, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his
arrows, looking at the sons of Dhåtaräñöra. O King, Arjuna then spoke to
Håñékeça [Kåñëa] these words:
PURPORT
The battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above
statement that the sons of Dhåtaräñöra were more or less disheartened by the
unexpected arrangement of military force by the Päëòavas, who were guided
by the direct instructions of Lord Kåñëa on the battlefield. The emblem of
Hanumän on the flag of Arjuna is another sign of victory because Hanumän
cooperated with Lord Räma in the battle between Räma and Rävaëa, and Lord
Räma emerged victorious. Now both Räma and Hanumän were present on the
chariot of Arjuna to help him. Lord Kåñëa is Räma Himself, and wherever Lord
Räma is, His eternal servitor Hanumän and His eternal consort Sétä, the
goddess of fortune, are present. Therefore, Arjuna had no cause to fear any
enemies whatsoever. And above all, the Lord of the senses, Lord Kåñëa, was
personally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel was available to


--- Page 27 ---
27
Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In such auspicious conditions,
arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee, lay the signs of assured victory.
TEXTS 21-22
AJauRNa ovac
SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae rQa& SQaaPaYa Mae_CYauTa )
YaavdeTaaiàrq+ae_h& Yaaed(Dauk-aMaaNaviSQaTaaNa( )) 21 ))
kE-MaRYaa Sah YaaeÖVYaMaiSMaNr<aSaMauÛMae )) 22 ))
arjuna uväca
senayor ubhayor madhye
rathaà sthäpaya me 'cyuta
yävad etän nirékñe 'haà
yoddhu-kämän avasthitän
kair mayä saha yoddhavyam
asmin raëa-samudyame
arjunaù—Arjuna; uväca—said; senayoù—of the armies; ubhayoù—of both the
parties; madhye—in between them; ratham—the chariot; sthäpaya—please
keep; me—my; acyuta—O infallible one; yävat—as long as; etän—all these;
nirékñe—may 
look; 
aham—I; 
yoddhu-kämän—desiring 
to 
fight;
avasthitän—arrayed on the battlefield; kaiù—with whom; mayä—by me;
saha—with; yoddhavyam—to fight with; asmin—in this; raëa—strife;
samudyame—in the attempt.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies
so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous of fighting, and with


--- Page 28 ---
28
whom I must contend in this great battle attempt.
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never fails in
His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed herein as infallible. As
charioteer, He had to carry out the orders of Arjuna, and since He did not
hesitate to do so, He is addressed as infallible. Although He had accepted the
position of a charioteer for His devotee, His supreme position was not
challenged. In all circumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Håñékeça, the Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and
His servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready to
render a service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is always seeking an
opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes greater pleasure in
His pure devotee's assuming the advantageous postion of ordering Him than
He does in being the giver of orders. As master, everyone is under His orders,
and no one is above Him to order Him. But when he finds that a pure devotee
is ordering Him, He obtains transcendental pleasure, although He is the
infallible master of all circumstances.
As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with his
cousins and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield by the
obstinacy of Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peaceful
negotiation. Therefore, he was very anxious to see who the leading persons
present on the battlefield were. Although there was no question of a
peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see them again, and to
see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwanted war.
TEXT 23
YaaeTSYaMaaNaaNave+ae_h& Ya WTae_}a SaMaaGaTaa" )


--- Page 29 ---
29
DaaTaRraí\SYa dubuRÖeYauRÖe iPa[Yaick-IzRv" )) 23 ))
yotsyamänän avekñe 'haà
ya ete 'tra samägatäù
dhärtaräñörasya durbuddher
yuddhe priya-cikérñavaù
yotsyamänän—those who will be fighting; avekñe—let me see; aham—I;
ye—who; 
ete—those; 
atra—here; 
samägatäù—assembled;
dhärtaräñörasya—the 
son 
of 
Dhåtaräñöra; 
durbuddheù—evil-minded;
yuddhe—in the fight; priya—well; cikérñavaù—wishing.
TRANSLATION
Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the
evil-minded son of Dhåtaräñöra.
PURPORT
It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of the
Päëòavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father, Dhåtaräñöra.
Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of Duryodhana must have been
birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to see them in the battlefield before
the fight was begun, just to learn who they were, but he had no intention of
proposing peace negotiations with them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see
them to make an estimate of the strength which he had to face, although he
was quite confident of victory because Kåñëa was sitting by his side.


--- Page 30 ---
30
TEXT 24
SaÅYa ovac
WvMau¢-ae ôzqke-Xaae Gau@ake-XaeNa >aarTa )
SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae SQaaPaiYaTva rQaaetaMaMa( )) 24 ))
saïjaya uväca
evam ukto håñékeço
guòäkeçena bhärata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthäpayitvä rathottamam


--- Page 31 ---
31
saïjayaù—Saïjaya; 
uväca—said; 
evam—thus; 
uktaù—addressed;
håñékeçaù—Lord Kåñëa; guòäkeçena—by Arjuna; bhärata—O descendant of
Bharata; senayoù—of armies; ubhayoù—of both; madhye—in the midst of;
sthäpayitvä—by placing; rathottamam—the finest chariot.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna, Lord
Kåñëa drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.
PURPORT
In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Guòäkeça. Guòäka means sleep, and
one who conquers sleep is called guòäkeça. Sleep also means ignorance. So
Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his friendship with
Kåñëa. As a great devotee of Kåñëa, he could not forget Kåñëa even for a
moment, because that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a
devotee of the Lord can never be free from thinking of Kåñëa's name, form,
quality and pastimes. Thus a devotee of Kåñëa can conquer both sleep and
ignorance simply by thinking of Kåñëa constantly. This is called Kåñëa
consciousness, or samädhi. As Håñékeça, or the director of the senses and mind
of every living entity, Kåñëa could understand Arjuna's purpose in placing the
chariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.
TEXT 25
>aqZMad]ae<aPa[Mau%Ta" SaveRza& c Mahqi+aTaaMa( )
ovac PaaQaR PaXYaETaaNSaMaveTaaNku-æiNaiTa )) 25 ))
bhéñma-droëa-pramukhataù
sarveñäà ca mahékñitäm


--- Page 32 ---
32
uväca pärtha paçyaitän
samavetän kurün iti
bhéñma—Grandfather Bhéñma; droëa—the teacher Droëa; pramukhataù—in
the front of; sarveñäm—all; ca—also; mahékñitäm—chiefs of the world;
uväca—said; pärtha—O Pärtha (son of Påthä); paçya—just behold; etän—all of
them; samavetän—assembled; kurün—all the members of the Kuru dynasty;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
In the presence of Bhéñma, Droëa and all other chieftains of the world,
Håñékeça, the Lord, said, Just behold, Pärtha, all the Kurus who are assembled
here.
PURPORT
As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Kåñëa could understand what
was going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Håñékeça in this
connection indicates that He knew everything. And the word Pärtha, or the
son of Kunté or Påthä, is also similarly significant in reference to Arjuna. As a
friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna that because Arjuna was the son of Påthä,
the sister of His own father Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of
Arjuna. Now what did Kåñëa mean when He told Arjuna to "behold the
Kurus"? Did Arjuna want to stop there and not fight? Kåñëa never expected
such things from the son of His aunt Påthä. The mind of Arjuna was thus
predicated by the Lord in friendly joking.
TEXT 26
Ta}aaPaXYaiTSQaTaaNPaaQaR" iPaTa›NaQa iPaTaaMahaNa( )
AacaYaaRNMaaTaul/aN>a]aTa›NPau}aaNPaaE}aaNSa%q„&STaQaa )


--- Page 33 ---
33
ìéuraNSauôdêEv SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeriPa )) 26 ))
taträpaçyat sthitän pärthaù
pitèn atha pitämahän
äcäryän mätulän bhrätèn
puträn pauträn sakhéàs tathä
çvaçurän suhådaç caiva
senayor ubhayor api
tatra—there; apaçyat—he could see; sthitän—standing; pärthaù—Arjuna;
pitèn—fathers; 
atha—also; 
pitämahän—grandfathers; 
äcäryän—teachers;
mätulän—maternal 
uncles; 
bhrätèn—brothers; 
puträn—sons;
pauträn—grandsons; sakhén—friends; tathä—too, çvaçurän—fathers-in-law;
suhådaù—wellwishers; ca—also; eva—certainly; senayoù—of the armies;
ubhayoù—of both parties; api—including.
TRANSLATION
There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his
fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons,
friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers—all present there.
PURPORT
On the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could see
persons like Bhüriçravä, who were his father's contemporaries, grandfathers
Bhéñma and Somadatta, teachers like Droëäcärya and Kåpäcärya, maternal
uncles like Çalya and Çakuni, brothers like Duryodhana, sons like Lakñmaëa,
friends like Açvatthämä, well-wishers like Kåtavarmä, etc. He could see also the
armies which contained many of his friends.


--- Page 34 ---
34


--- Page 35 ---
35
TEXT 27
TaaNSaMaq+Ya Sa k-aENTaeYa" SavaRNbNDaUNaviSQaTaaNa( )
k*-PaYaa ParYaaivíae ivzqdiàdMab]vqTa( )) 27 ))
tän samékñya sa kaunteyaù
sarvän bandhün avasthitän
kåpayä parayäviñöo
viñédann idam abravét
tän—all of them; samékñya—after seeing; saù—he; kaunteyaù—the son of
Kunté; sarvän—all kinds of; bandhün—relatives; avasthitän—situated;
kåpayä—by compassion; parayä—of a high grade; äviñöaù—overwhelmed by;
viñédan—while lamenting; idam—thus; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
When the son of Kunté, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and
relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus:
TEXT 28
AJauRNa ovac
d*îeMa& SvJaNa& k*-Z<a YauYauTSau& SaMauPaiSQaTaMa( )
SaqdiNTa MaMa Gaa}aai<a Mau%& c PairéuZYaiTa )) 28 ))
arjuna uväca
dåñövemaà svajanaà kåñëa
yuyutsuà samupasthitam
sédanti mama gäträëi
mukhaà ca pariçuñyati


--- Page 36 ---
36
arjunaù—Arjuna; uväca—said; dåñövä—after seeing; imam—all these;
svajanam—kinsmen; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; yuyutsum—all in fighting spirit;
samupasthitam—all present; sédanti—quivering; mama—my; gäträëi—limbs of
the body; mukham—mouth; ca—also; pariçuñyati—drying up.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Kåñëa, seeing my friends and relatives present before
me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth
drying up.
PURPORT
Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the nondevotee,
however advanced he may be in material qualifications by education and
culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen,
friends and relatives on the battlefield, was at once overwhelmed by
compassion for them who had so decided to fight amongst themselves. As far as
his soldiers were concerned, he was sympathetic from the beginning, but he
felt compassion even for the soldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their
imminent death. And so thinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and
his mouth became dry. He was more or less astonished to see their fighting
spirit. Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, had come
to fight with him. This overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna. Although it is
not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine that not only were Arjuna's
bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up, but that he was also crying out
of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but to his
softheartedness, a characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said
therefore:
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä


--- Page 37 ---
37
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
mano-rathenäsati dhävato bahiù
"One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all the
good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord has
only material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is
hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring
material energy." (Bhäg. 5.18.12)
TEXT 29
vePaQauê Xarqre Mae raeMahzRê JaaYaTae )
Gaa<@qv& ó&SaTae hSTaatvKcEv PairdùTae )) 29 ))
vepathuç ca çarére me
roma-harñaç ca jäyate
gäëòévaà sraàsate hastät
tvak caiva paridahyate
vepathuù—trembling of the body; ca—also; çarére—on the body; me—my;
roma-harñaù—standing of hair on end; ca—also; jäyate—is taking place;
gäëòévam—the bow of Arjuna; sraàsate—is slipping; hastät—from the hands;
tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—burning.
TRANSLATION
My whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow
Gäëòéva is slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.
PURPORT


--- Page 38 ---
38
There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of standings of
the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great spiritual ecstasy or out
of great fear under material conditions. There is no fear in transcendental
realization. Arjuna's symptoms in this situation are out of material
fear—namely, loss of life. This is evident from other symptoms also; he became
so impatient that his famous bow Gäëòéva was slipping from his hands, and,
because his heart was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation
of the skin. All these are due to a material conception of life.
TEXT 30
Na c Xa¥-aeMYavSQaaTau& >a]MaTaqv c Mae MaNa" )
iNaiMataaiNa c PaXYaaiMa ivParqTaaiNa ke-Xav )) 30 ))
na ca çaknomy avasthätuà
bhramatéva ca me manaù
nimittäni ca paçyämi
viparétäni keçava
na—nor; 
ca—also; 
çaknomi—am 
I 
able; 
avasthätum—to 
stay;
bhramati—forgetting; 
iva—as; 
ca—and; 
me—my; 
manaù—mind;
nimittäni—causes; ca—also; paçyämi—I foresee; viparétäni—just the opposite;
keçava—O killer of the demon Keçé (Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my
mind is reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Keçé demon.
PURPORT


--- Page 39 ---
39
Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield, and he
was forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind. Excessive
attachment for material things puts a man in a bewildering condition of
existence. Bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù: such fearfulness and loss of mental
equilibrium take place in persons who are too affected by material conditions.
Arjuna envisioned only unhappiness in the battlefield—he would not be
happy even by gaining victory over the foe. The word nimitta is significant.
When a man sees only frustration in his expectations, he thinks, "Why am I
here?" Everyone is interested in himself and his own welfare. No one is
interested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is supposed to show disregard for
self-interest by submission to the will of Kåñëa, who is everyone's real
self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and therefore suffers material
pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle would only be a cause of
lamentation for him.
TEXT 31
Na c é[eYaae_NauPaXYaaiMa hTva SvJaNaMaahve )
Na k-a¿e ivJaYa& k*-Z<a Na c raJYa& Sau%aiNa c )) 31 ))
na ca çreyo 'nupaçyämi
hatvä sva-janam ähave
na käìkñe vijayaà kåñëa
na ca räjyaà sukhäni ca
na—nor; ca—also; çreyaù—good; anupaçyämi—do I foresee; hatvä—by killing;
svajanam—own kinsmen; ähave—in the fight; na—nor; känkñe—do I desire;
vijayam—victory; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; na—nor; ca—also; räjyam—kingdom;
sukhäni—happiness thereof; ca—also.


--- Page 40 ---
40
TRANSLATION
I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Kåñëa, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or
happiness.
PURPORT
Without knowing that one's self-interest is in Viñëu (or Kåñëa),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in
such situations. Under delusion, they forget that Kåñëa is also the cause of
material happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes for
a kñatriya. It is said that two kinds of men, namely the kñatriya who dies
directly in front of the battlefield under Kåñëa's personal orders and the person
in the renounced order of life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are
eligible to enter into the sun-globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna is
reluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thought that by
killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and therefore he
was not willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is not
inclined to cook. He has now decided to go into the forest and live a secluded
life in frustration. But as a kñatriya, he requires a kingdom for his subsistence,
because the kñatriyas cannot engage themselves in any other occupation. But
Arjuna has had no kingdom. Arjuna's sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom
lay in fighting with his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom
inherited from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers
himself fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.
TEXTS 32-35
ik&- Naae raJYaeNa GaaeivNd ik&- >aaeGaEJas„ivTaeNa va )
YaezaMaQaeR k-ax(i+aTa& Naae raJYa& >aaeGaa" Sau%aiNa c )) 32 ))


--- Page 41 ---
41
Ta wMae_viSQaTaa YauÖe Pa[a<aa&STYa¤-a DaNaaiNa c )
AacaYaaR" iPaTar" Pau}aaSTaQaEv c iPaTaaMaha" )) 33 ))
MaaTaul/a" ìéura" PaaE}aa" XYaal/a" SaMbiNDaNaSTaQaa )
WTaaà hNTauiMaC^aiMa ganTaae_iPa MaDauSaUdNa )) 34 ))
AiPa }aEl/aeKYaraJYaSYa heTaae" ik&- Nau Mahqk*-Tae )
iNahTYa DaaTaRraí\aà" k-a Pa[qiTa" SYaaÂNaadRNa )) 35 ))
kià no räjyena govinda
kià bhogair jévitena vä
yeñäm arthe käìkñitaà no
räjyaà bhogäù sukhäni ca
ta ime 'vasthitä yuddhe
präëäàs tyaktvä dhanäni ca
äcäryäù pitaraù puträs
tathaiva ca pitämahäù
mätuläù çvaçuräù pauträù
çyäläù sambandhinas tathä
etän na hantum icchämi
ghnato 'pi madhusüdana
api trailokya-räjyasya
hetoù kià nu mahé-kåte
nihatya dhärtaräñörän naù
kä prétiù syäj janärdana
kim—what use; naù—to us; räjyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O Kåñëa;
kim—what; bhogaiù—enjoyment; jévitena—by living; vä—either; yeñäm—for
whom; 
arthe—for 
the 
matter 
of; 
käìkñitam—desired; 
naù—our;
räjyam—kingdom; bhogäù—material enjoyment; sukhäni—all happiness;
ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these; avasthitäù—situated; yuddhe—in this


--- Page 42 ---
42
battlefield; präëän—lives; tyaktvä—giving up; dhanäni—riches; ca—also;
äcäryäù—teachers; 
pitaraù—fathers; 
puträù—sons; 
tathä—as 
well 
as;
eva—certainly; 
ca—also; 
pitämahäù—grandfathers; 
mätuläù—maternal
uncles; 
çvaçuräù—fathers-in-law; 
pauträù—grandsons;
çyäläù—brothers-in-law; sambandhinaù—relatives; tathä—as well as; etän—all
these; na—never; hantum—for killing; icchämi—do I wish; ghnataù—being
killed; api—even; madhusüdana—O killer of the demon Madhu (Kåñëa);
api—even if; trailokya—of the three worlds; räjyasya—of the kingdoms;
hetoù—in exchange; kim—what to speak of; nu—only; mahé-kåte—for the sake
of earth; nihatya—by killing; dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra;
naù—our; kä—what; prétiù—pleasure; syät—will there be; janärdana—O
maintainer of all living entities.
TRANSLATION
O Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life itself
when all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed in this battlefield?
O Madhusüdana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives are ready to give up
their lives and properties and are standing before me, then why should I wish to
kill them, though I may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not
prepared to fight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone this
earth.
PURPORT
Arjuna has addressed Lord Kåñëa as Govinda because Kåñëa is the object of
all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna
indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govinda is not meant for
satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the senses of Govinda then
automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially, everyone wants to satisfy
his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier for such satisfaction. The


--- Page 43 ---
43
Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as much as they deserve, but
not to the extent that they may covet. But when one takes the opposite
way—namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring
to satisfy one's own senses—then by the grace of Govinda all desires of the
living entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community and family
members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion for them. He is
therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show his opulence to friends
and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his relatives and friends will be killed in
the battlefield, and he will be unable to share his opulence after victory. This is
a typical calculation of material life. The transcendental life is, however,
different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, he can, Lord
willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the Lord, and if the Lord
is not willing, he should not accept a farthing. Arjuna did not want to kill his
relatives, and if there were any need to kill them, he desired that Kåñëa kill
them personally. At this point he did not know that Kåñëa had already killed
them before their coming into the battlefield and that he was only to become
an instrument for Kåñëa. This fact is disclosed in following chapters. As a
natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against his
miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that they should all
be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate against the wrongdoer, but
the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done to the devotee by the miscreants.
The Lord can excuse a person on His own account, but He excuses no one who
has done harm to His devotees. Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the
miscreants, although Arjuna wanted to excuse them.
TEXT 36
PaaPaMaevaé[YaedSMaaNhTvETaaNaaTaTaaiYaNa" )
TaSMaaàahaR vYa& hNTau& DaaTaRraí\aNSabaNDavaNa( )


--- Page 44 ---
44
SvJaNa& ih k-Qa& hTva Saui%Na" SYaaMa MaaDav )) 36 ))
päpam eväçrayed asmän
hatvaitän ätatäyinaù
tasmän närhä vayaà hantuà
dhärtaräñörän sabändhavän
sva-janaà hi kathaà hatvä
sukhinaù syäma mädhava
päpam—vices; 
eva—certainly; 
äçrayet—must 
take 
upon; 
asmän—us;
hatvä—by killing; etän—all these; ätatäyinaù—aggressors; tasmät—therefore;
na—never; 
arhäù—deserving; 
vayam—us; 
hantum—to 
kill;
dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; svabändhavän—along with friends;
svajanam—kinsmen; 
hi—certainly; 
katham—how; 
hatvä—by 
killing;
sukhinaù—happy; syäma—become; mädhava—O Kåñëa, husband of the
goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for
us to kill the sons of Dhåtaräñöra and our friends. What should we gain, O
Kåñëa, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing
our own kinsmen?
PURPORT
According to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a poison
giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attacks with deadly
weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupies another's land, and
6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at once to be killed, and no sin
is incurred by killing such aggressors. Such killing of aggressors is quite
befitting for any ordinary man, but Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He was


--- Page 45 ---
45
saintly by character, and therefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness.
This kind of saintliness, however, is not for a kñatriya. Although a responsible
man in the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he should not be
cowardly. For example, Lord Räma was so saintly that people were anxious to
live in His kingdom, (Räma-räjya), but Lord Räma never showed any
cowardice. Rävaëa was an aggressor against Räma because he kidnapped
Räma's wife, Sétä, but Lord Räma gave him sufficient lessons, unparalleled in
the history of the world. In Arjuna's case, however, one should consider the
special type of aggressors, namely his own grandfather, own teacher, friends,
sons, grandsons, etc. Because of them, Arjuna thought that he should not take
the severe steps necessary against ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly
persons are advised to forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more
important than any political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than
kill his own kinsmen for political reasons, it would be better to forgive them on
grounds of religion and saintly behavior. He did not, therefore, consider such
killing profitable simply for the matter of temporary bodily happiness. After all,
kingdoms and pleasures derived therefrom are not permanent, so why should
he risk his life and eternal salvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna's
addressing of Kåñëa as "Mädhava," or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is
also significant in this connection. He wanted to point out to Kåñëa that, as
husband of the goddess of fortune, He should not have to induce Arjuna to
take up a matter which would ultimately bring about misfortune. Kåñëa,
however, never brings misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of His devotees.
TEXTS 37-38
YaÛPYaeTae Na PaXYaiNTa l/ae>aaePahTaceTaSa" )
ku-l/+aYak*-Ta& daez& iMa}ad]aehe c PaaTak-Ma( )) 37 ))
k-Qa& Na jeYaMaSMaai>a" PaaPaadSMaaiàviTaRTauMa( )


--- Page 46 ---
46
ku-l/+aYak*-Ta& daez& Pa[PaXYaiÙJaRNaadRNa )) 38 ))
yady apy ete na paçyanti
lobhopahata-cetasaù
kula-kñaya-kåtaà doñaà
mitra-drohe ca pätakam
kathaà na jïeyam asmäbhiù
päpäd asmän nivartitum
kula-kñaya-kåtaà doñaà
prapaçyadbhir janärdana
yadi—if; api—certainly; ete—they; na—do not; paçyanti—see; lobha—greed;
upahata—overpowered; cetasaù—the hearts; kula-kñaya—in killing the family;
kåtam—done; doñam—fault; mitra-drohe—quarreling with friends; ca—also;
pätakam—sinful reactions; katham—why; na—shall not; jïeyam—know this;
asmäbhiù—by us; päpät—from sins; asmät—ourselves; nivartitum—to cease;
kula-kñaya—the destruction of a dynasty; kåtam—by so doing; doñam—crime;
prapaçyadbhiù—by those who can see; janärdana—O Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
O Janärdana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing
one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we, with knowledge of the
sin, engage in these acts?
PURPORT
A kñatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so invited
by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could not refuse to fight
because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana. In this connection,
Arjuna considered that the other party might be blind to the effects of such a
challenge. Arjuna, however, could see the evil consequences and could not


--- Page 47 ---
47
accept the challenge. Obligation is actually binding when the effect is good,
but when the effect is otherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all
these pros and cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.
TEXT 39
ku-l/+aYae Pa[<aXYaiNTa ku-l/DaMaaR" SaNaaTaNaa" )
DaMaeR Naíe ku-l&/ k*-TòMaDaMaaeR_i>a>avTYauTa )) 39 ))
kula-kñaye praëaçyanti
kula-dharmäù sanätanäù
dharme nañöe kulaà kåtsnam
adharmo 'bhibhavaty uta
kula-kñaye—in destroying the family; praëaçyanti—becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmäù—the 
family 
traditions; 
sanätanäù—eternal; 
dharme—in
religion; 
nañöe—being 
destroyed; 
kulam—family; 
kåtsnam—wholesale;
adharmaù—irreligious; abhibhavati—transforms; uta—it is said.
TRANSLATION
With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished,
and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligious practice.
PURPORT
In the system of the varëäçrama institution there are many principles of
religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly and attain
spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such purifying processes
in the family, beginning from birth to death. But on the death of the elder
members, such family traditions of purification may stop, and the remaining
younger family members may develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their


--- Page 48 ---
48
chance for spiritual salvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder
members of the family be slain.
TEXT 40
ADaMaaRi>a>avaTk*-Z<a Pa[duZYaiNTa ku-l/iñYa" )
ñqzu duíaSau vaZ<aeRYa JaaYaTae v<aRSaªr" )) 40 ))
adharmäbhibhavät kåñëa
praduñyanti kula-striyaù
stréñu duñöäsu värñëeya
jäyate varëa-saìkaraù
adharma—irreligion; abhibhavät—having been predominant; kåñëa—O Kåñëa;
praduñyanti—become polluted; kula-striyaù—family ladies; stréñu—of the
womanhood; duñöäsu—being so polluted; värñëeya—O descendant of Våñëi;
jäyate—it so becomes; varëa-saìkaraù—unwanted progeny.
TRANSLATION
When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Kåñëa, the women of the
family become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant
of Våñëi, comes unwanted progeny.
PURPORT
Good population in human society is the basic principle for peace,
prosperity and spiritual progress in life. The varëäçrama religion's principles
were so designed that the good population would prevail in society for the
general spiritual progress of state and community. Such population depends on
the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood. As children are very prone to
be misled, women are similarly very prone to degradation. Therefore, both


--- Page 49 ---
49
children and women require protection by the elder members of the family. By
being engaged in various religious practices, women will not be misled into
adultery. According to Cäëakya Paëòit, women are generally not very
intelligent and therefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions of
religious activities should always engage them, and thus their chastity and
devotion will give birth to a good population eligible for participating in the
varëäçrama system. On the failure of such varëäçrama-dharma, naturally the
women become free to act and mix with men, and thus adultery is indulged in
at the risk of unwanted population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in
society, and thus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war
and pestilence.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 41
Saªrae Nark-aYaEv ku-l/ganaNaa& ku-l/SYa c )
PaTaiNTa iPaTarae ùeza& lu/áiPa<@aedk-i§-Yaa" )) 41 ))
saìkaro narakäyaiva
kula-ghnänäà kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy eñäà
lupta-piëòodaka-kriyäù
saìkaraù—such unwanted children; narakäya—for hellish life; eva—certainly;
kula-ghnänäm—of those who are killers of the family; kulasya—of the family;
ca—also; patanti—fall down; pitaraù—forefathers; hi—certainly; eñäm—of
them; lupta—stopped; piëòa—offerings; udaka—water; kriyäù—performance.
TRANSLATION
When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is created


--- Page 50 ---
50
both for the family and for those who destroy the family tradition. In such
corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations of food and water to the
ancestors.
PURPORT
According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is a need
to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of the family. This offering
is performed by worship of Viñëu, because eating the remnants of food offered
to Viñëu can deliver one from all kinds of sinful actions. Sometimes the
forefathers may be suffering from various types of sinful reactions, and
sometimes some of them cannot even acquire a gross material body and are
forced to remain in subtle bodies as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasädam
food are offered to forefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released
from ghostly or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers
is a family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are required to
perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional life is not required
to perform such actions. Simply by performing devotional service, one can
deliver hundreds and thousands of forefathers from all kinds of misery. It is
stated in the Bhägavatam:
devarñi-bhütäpta-nånäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyamåëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
"Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers." (Bhäg. 11.5.41)
Such obligations are automatically fulfilled by performance of devotional
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 51 ---
51
TEXT 42
daezEreTaE" ku-l/ganaNaa& v<aRSaªrk-arkE-" )
oTSaaÛNTae JaaiTaDaMaaR" ku-l/DaMaaRê XaaìTaa" )) 42 ))
doñair etaiù kula-ghnänäà
varëa-saìkara-kärakaiù
utsädyante jäti-dharmäù
kula-dharmäç ca çäçvatäù
doñaiù—by such faults; etaiù—all these; kula-ghnänäm—of the destroyer of a
family; 
varëa-saìkara—unwanted 
children; 
kärakaiù—by 
the 
doers;
utsädyante—causes 
devastation; 
jäti-dharmäù—community 
project;
kula-dharmäù—family tradition; ca—also; çäçvatäù—eternal.
TRANSLATION
Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds of
community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.
PURPORT
The four orders of human society, combined with family welfare activities as
they are set forth by the institution of the sanätana-dharma or
varëäçrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to attain his
ultimate salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanätana-dharma tradition
by irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaos in that society, and
consequently people forget the aim of life—Viñëu. Such leaders are called
blind, and persons who follow such leaders are sure to be led into chaos.


--- Page 52 ---
52
TEXT 43
oTSaàku-l/DaMaaR<aa& MaNauZYaa<aa& JaNaadRNa )
Narke- iNaYaTa& vaSaae >avTaqTYaNauéué[uMa )) 43 ))
utsanna-kula-dharmäëäà
manuñyäëäà janärdana
narake niyataà väso
bhavatéty anuçuçruma
utsanna—spoiled; kula-dharmäëäm—of those who have the family traditions;
manuñyäëäm—of 
such 
men; 
janärdana—O 
Kåñëa; 
narake—in 
hell;
niyatam—always; väsaù—residence; bhavati—it so becomes; iti—thus;
anuçuçruma—I have heard by disciplic succession.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that
those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.
PURPORT
Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on what
he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving real knowledge.
One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge without being helped by
the right person who is already established in that knowledge. There is a system
in the varëäçrama institution by which one has to undergo the process of
ablution before death for his sinful activities. One who is always engaged in
sinful activities must utilize the process of ablution called the präyaçcitta.
Without doing so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo
miserable lives as the result of sinful activities.


--- Page 53 ---
53
TEXT 44
Ahae bTa MahTPaaPa& k-Tau| VYaviSaTaa vYaMa( )
Yad]aJYaSau%l/ae>aeNa hNTau& SvJaNaMauÛTaa" )) 44 ))
aho bata mahat päpaà
kartuà vyavasitä vayam
yad räjya-sukha-lobhena
hantuà sva-janam udyatäù
ahaù—alas; bata—how strange it is; mahat—great; päpam—sins; kartum—to
perform; vyavasitäù—decided; vayam—we; yat—so that; räjya—kingdom;
sukha-lobhena—driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum—to kill;
svajanam—kinsmen; udyatäù—trying for.
TRANSLATION
Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts,
driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.
PURPORT
Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as the
killing of one's own brother, father, or mother. There are many such instances
in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly devotee of the Lord, is
always conscious of moral principles and therefore takes care to avoid such
activities.
TEXT 45
Yaid MaaMaPa[Taqk-arMaXañ& XañPaa<aYa" )


--- Page 54 ---
54
DaaTaRraí\a r<ae hNYauSTaNMae +aeMaTar& >aveTa( )) 45 ))
yadi mäm apratékäram
açastraà çastra-päëayaù
dhärtaräñörä raëe hanyus
tan me kñemataraà bhavet
yadi—even if; mäm—unto me; apratékäram—without being resistant;
açastram—without being fully equipped; çastra-päëayaù—those with weapons
in hand; dhärtaräñöräù—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; raëe—in the battlefield;
hanyuù—may 
kill; 
tat—that; 
me—mine; 
kñemataram—better;
bhavet—become.
TRANSLATION
I would consider it better for the sons of Dhåtaräñöra to kill me unarmed and
unresisting, rather than fight with them.
PURPORT
It is the custom—according to kñatriya fighting principles—that an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, in such
an enigmatic position, decided he would not fight if he were attacked by the
enemy. He did not consider how much the other party was bent upon fighting.
All these symptoms are due to softheartedness resulting from his being a great
devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 46
SaÅYa ovac
WvMau¤-aJauRNa" Sa&:Yae rQaaePaSQa oPaaivXaTa( )


--- Page 55 ---
55
ivSa*JYa SaXar& caPa& Xaaek-Sa&ivGanMaaNaSa" )) 46 ))
saïjaya uväca
evam uktvärjunaù saìkhye
rathopastha upäviçat
visåjya sa-çaraà cäpaà
çoka-saàvigna-mänasaù
saïjayaù—Saïjaya; 
uväca—said; 
evam—thus; 
uktvä—saying;
arjunaù—Arjuna; 
saìkhye—in 
the 
battlefield; 
ratha—chariot;
upasthaù—situated on; upäviçat—sat down again; visåjya—keeping aside;
sa-çaram—along 
with 
arrows; 
cäpam—the 
bow; 
çoka—lamentation;
saàvigna—distressed; mänasaù—within the mind.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his
bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.
PURPORT
While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the chariot,
but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down again, setting aside
his bow and arrows. Such a kind and softhearted person, in the devotional
service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra.
