--- Page 1 ---
1
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is [1972] 
OTHER BOOKS
by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda
Çrémad-Bhägavatam
Teachings of Lord Caitanya 
Kåñëa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead (2 volumes)
Çré Éçopaniñad
Easy Journey to Other Planets
Kåñëa Consciousness: The Topmost Yoga System
The Nectar of Devotion 
The Kåñëa Consciousness Movement is the Genuine Vedic Way
Back to Godhead Magazine (Founder)
COMPLETE EDITION
with original Sanskrit text,
Roman transliteration, English equivalents,
translation and elaborate purports
His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda
The Macmillan Company, New York, New York
Collier- Macmillan Limited, London
Copyright© 1972 by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda
Readers interested in the subject matter of this


--- Page 2 ---
2
book are invited by the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness to correspond with its Secretary. 
International Society for Krishna Consciousness
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 72-79319
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission from the Publisher.
First Printing
The Macmillan Company
866 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
Collier-Macmillan Canada Ltd., Toronto, Ontario
Printed in the United States of America


--- Page 3 ---
3


--- Page 4 ---
4
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda 
the Founder-Äcärya of ISKCON and greatest exponent of 
Kåñëa consciousness in the western world.


--- Page 5 ---
5


--- Page 6 ---
6
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé


--- Page 7 ---
7


--- Page 8 ---
8
Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkura


--- Page 9 ---
9


--- Page 10 ---
10
Çréla Gaura Kiçora Däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja
From the back cover:
A masterpiece of scriptural literature, Bhagavad-gétä is a sacred “song” in
the form of a battlefield dialogue between the Lord Çré Kåñëa and Arjuna, His
friend and disciple. Kåñëa, acting as Arjuna’s adviser, instructs him in the
science of self-realization, teaching him how to live as a devotee of the Lord
and to thus reach the eternal spiritual world while continuing to perform his
earthly duties. Çréla Prabhupäda’s Gétä, completely new in its authenticity, is
addressed to all humanity, for it clearly teaches the purpose of the human form
of life—to cultivate spiritual knowledge. This edition of the work presents this
knowledge as it was originally handed down, without being adulterated by
philosophical interpretation. It is fully indexed and cross-referenced and is
illustrated with forty-four magnificent full-color paintings—original works
painted especially for this volume to depict events in the Gétä and exemplify
the teachings of Kåñëa. Containing the original Sanskrit text, Roman
transliterations, English synonyms, translation and commentary, Bhagavad-gétä
As It Is is the most complete and authoritative transmission of this timeless
scripture in print and the only one that does not obscure the true spirit of
Kåñëa’s teachings.
HIS DIVINE GRACE A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI
PRABHUPÄDA, the leading exponent of the science of Krsna consciousness
in the West and the world’s most distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and
thought, is the author of Çrémad Bhägavatam, Kåñëa and many other English
versions of Vedic literature. He is a fully self-realized devotee of Lord Krsna
and is the latest disciple in a succession that originally began with Kåñëa
Himself. He is the founder and spiritual master of the international Society for
Krishna Consciousness, which now has centers in major cities throughout the


--- Page 11 ---
11
world.
Dedication
To
ÇRÉLA BALADEVA VIDYÄBHÜÑAËA
who presented so nicely
the "Govinda-bhäñya" commentary
on
Vedänta philosophy
Foreword
The Bhagavad-gétä is the best known and the most frequently translated of
Vedic religious texts. Why it should be so appealing to the Western mind is an
interesting question. It has drama, for its setting is a scene of two great armies,
banners flying, drawn up opposite one another on the field, poised for battle. It
has ambiguity, and the fact that Arjuna and his charioteer Kåñëa are carrying
on their dialogue between the two armies suggests the indecision of Arjuna
about the basic question: should he enter battle against and kill those who are
friends and kinsmen? It has mystery, as Kåñëa demonstrates to Arjuna His
cosmic form. It has a properly complicated view of the ways of the religious life
and treats of the paths of knowledge, works, discipline and faith and their
inter-relationships, problems that have bothered adherents of other religions
in other times and places. The devotion spoken of is a deliberate means of
religious satisfaction, not a mere outpouring of poetic emotion. Next to the


--- Page 12 ---
12
Bhägavata-puräëa, a long work from South India, the Gétä is the text most
frequently quoted in the philosophical writings of the Gauòéya Vaiñëava
school, the school represented by Swami Bhaktivedanta as the latest in a long
succession of teachers. It can be said that this school of Vaiñëavism was
founded, or revived, by Çré Kåñëa-Caitanya Mahäprabhu (1486-1533) in Bengal,
and that it is currently the strongest single religious force in the eastern part of
the Indian subcontinent. The Gauòiya Vaiñëava school, for whom Kåñëa is
Himself the Supreme God, and not merely an incarnation of another deity,
sees bhakti as an immediate and powerful religious force, consisting of love
between man and God. Its discipline consists of devoting all one's actions to
the Deity, and one listens to the stories of Kåñëa from the sacred texts, one
chants Kåñëa's name, washes, bathes, and dresses the mürti of Kåñëa, feeds Him
and takes the remains of the food offered to Him, thus absorbing His grace; one
does these things and many more, until one has been changed: the devotee has
become transformed into one close to Kåñëa, and sees the Lord face to face.
Swami Bhaktivedanta comments upon the Gétä from this point of view, and
that is legitimate. More than that, in this translation the Western reader has
the unique opportunity of seeing how a Kåñëa devotee interprets his own texts.
It is the Vedic exegetical tradition, justly famous, in action. This book is then a
welcome addition from many points of view. It can serve as a valuable textbook
for the college student. It allows us to listen to a skilled interpreter explicating
a text which has profound religious meaning. It gives us insights into the
original and highly convincing ideas of the Gauòiya Vaiñëava school. In
providing the Sanskrit in both Devanagari and transliteration, it offers the
Sanskrit specialist the opportunity to re-interpret, or debate particular Sanskrit
meanings—although I think there will be little disagreement about the quality
of the Swami's Sanskrit scholarship. And finally, for the nonspecialist, there is
readable English and a devotional attitude which cannot help but move the
sensitive reader. And there are the paintings, which, incredibly as it may seem
to those familiar with contemporary Indian religious art, were done by


--- Page 13 ---
13
American devotees.
The scholar, the student of Gauòéya Vaiñëavism, and the increasing number
of Western readers interested in classical Vedic thought have been done a
service by Swami Bhaktivedanta. By bringing us a new and living
interpretation of a text already known to many, he has increased our
understanding manyfold; and arguments for understanding, in these days of
estrangement, need not be made.
Professor Edward C. Dimock, Jr.
Department of South Asian Languages and Civilization
University of Chicago
Preface
Originally I wrote Bhagavad-gétä As It Is in the form in which it is presented
now. When this book was first published, the original manuscript was,
unfortunately, cut short to less than 400 pages, without illustrations and
without explanations for most of the original verses of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä. In all of my other books—Çrémad Bhägavatam, Çré Éçopaniñad,
etc.—the system is that I give the original verse, its English transliteration,
word-for-word Sanskrit-English equivalents, translations and purports. This
makes the book very authentic and scholarly and makes the meaning
self-evident. I was not very happy, therefore, when I had to minimize my
original manuscript. But later on, when the demand for Bhagavad-gétä As It Is
considerably increased, I was requested by many scholars and devotees to
present the book in its original form, and Messrs. Macmillan and Co. agreed to


--- Page 14 ---
14
publish the complete edition. Thus the present attempt is to offer the original
manuscript of this great book of knowledge with full paramparä explanation in
order to establish the Kåñëa consciousness movement more soundly and
progressively.
Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is genuine, historically authorized,
natural and transcendental due to its being based on Bhagavad-gétä As It Is. It
is gradually becoming the most popular movement in the entire world,
especially amongst the younger generation. It is becoming more and more
interesting to the older generation also. Older gentlemen are becoming
interested, so much so that the fathers and grandfathers of my disciples are
encouraging us by becoming life members of our great society, the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness. In Los Angeles many fathers
and mothers used to come to see me to express their feelings of gratitude for my
leading the Kåñëa consciousness movement throughout the entire world. Some
of them said that it is greatly fortunate for the Americans that I have started
the Kåñëa consciousness movement in America. But actually the original
father of this movement is Lord Kåñëa Himself, since it was started a very long
time ago but is coming down to human society by disciplic succession. If I have
any credit in this connection, it does not belong to me personally, but it is due
to my eternal spiritual master, His Divine Grace Om Viñëupäda Paramahaàsa
Parivräjakäcärya 108 Çré Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja
Prabhupäda.
If personally I have any credit in this matter, it is only that I have tried to
present Bhagavad-gétä as it is, without adulteration. Before my presentation of
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, almost all the English editions of Bhagavad-gétä were
introduced to fulfill someone's personal ambition. But our attempt, in
presenting Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, is to present the mission of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Our business is to present the will of Kåñëa, not
that of any mundane speculator like the politician, philosopher or scientist, for
they have very little knowledge of Kåñëa, despite all their other knowledge.


--- Page 15 ---
15
When Kåñëa says, man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru, etc.,
we, unlike the so-called scholars, do not say that Kåñëa and His inner spirit are
different. Kåñëa is absolute, and there is no difference between Kåñëa's name,
Kåñëa's form, Kåñëa's quality, Kåñëa's pastimes, etc. This absolute position of
Kåñëa is difficult to understand for any person who is not a devotee of Kåñëa in
the paramparä (disciplic succession) system. Generally the so-called scholars,
politicians, philosophers, and svämés, without perfect knowledge of Kåñëa, try
to banish or kill Kåñëa when writing commentary on Bhagavad-gétä. Such
unauthorized commentary upon Bhagavad-gétä is known as Mäyävädé-Bhäñya,
and Lord Caitanya has warned us about these unauthorized men. Lord
Caitanya clearly says [Madhya 6.169] that anyone who tries to understand
Bhagavad-gétä from the Mäyävädé point of view will commit a great blunder.
The result of such a blunder will be that the misguided student of
Bhagavad-gétä will certainly be bewildered on the path of spiritual guidance
and will not be able to go back home, back to Godhead.
Our only purpose is to present this Bhagavad-gétä As It Is in order to guide
the conditioned student to the same purpose for which Kåñëa descends to this
planet once in a day of Brahmä, or every 8,600,000,000 years. This purpose is
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, and we have to accept it as it is; otherwise there is no
point in trying to understand the Bhagavad-gétä and its speaker, Lord Kåñëa.
Lord Kåñëa first spoke Bhagavad-gétä to the sun-god [4.1] some hundreds of
millions of years ago. We have to accept this fact and thus understand the
historical significance of Bhagavad-gétä, without misinterpretation, on the
authority of Kåñëa. To interpret Bhagavad-gétä without any reference to the
will of Kåñëa is the greatest offense. In order to save oneself from this offense,
one has to understand the Lord as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as He
was directly understood by Arjuna, Lord Kåñëa's first disciple. Such
understanding of Bhagavad-gétä is really profitable and authorized for the
welfare of human society in fulfilling the mission of life.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is essential in human society, for it


--- Page 16 ---
16
offers the highest perfection of life. How this is so is explained fully in the
Bhagavad-gétä [4.9]. Unfortunately, mundane wranglers have taken advantage
of Bhagavad-gétä to push forward their demonic propensities and mislead
people regarding right understanding of the simple principles of life. Everyone
should know how God or Kåñëa is great, and everyone should know the factual
position of the living entities. Everyone should know that a living entity is
eternally a servant and that unless one serves Kåñëa one has to serve illusion in
different varieties of the three modes of material nature, and thus perpetually
one has to wander within the cycle of birth and death; even the so-called
liberated Mäyävädé speculator has to undergo this process. This knowledge
constitutes a great science, and each and every living being has to hear it for
his own interest.
People in general, especially in this age of Kali, are enamored by the
external energy of Kåñëa, and they wrongly think that by advancement of
material comforts every man will be happy. They have no knowledge that the
material or external nature is very strong, for everyone is strongly bound by the
stringent laws of material nature. A living entity is happily the part and parcel
of the Lord, and thus his natural function is to render immediate service to the
Lord. By the spell of illusion one tries to be happy by serving his personal sense
gratification in different forms which will never make him happy. Instead of
satisfying his own personal material senses, he has to satisfy the senses of the
Lord. That is the highest perfection of life. The Lord wants this, and He
demands it. One has to understand this central point of Bhagavad-gétä. Our
Kåñëa consciousness movement is teaching the whole world this central point,
and because we are not polluting the theme of Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, anyone
seriously interested in deriving benefit by studying the Bhagavad-gétä must
take help from the Kåñëa consciousness movement for practical understanding
of Bhagavad-gétä under the direct guidance of the Lord. We hope, therefore,
that people will derive the greatest benefit by studying Bhagavad-gétä As It Is as
we have presented it here, and if even one man becomes a pure devotee of the


--- Page 17 ---
17
Lord we shall consider our attempt a success.
[signed] A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
12 May 1971
Sydney, Australia
Introduction
om ajïäna-timirändhasya jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena tasmai çré-gurave namaù
çré-caitanya-mano-'bhéñöaà sthäpitaà yena bhü-tale
svayaà rüpaù kadä mahyaà dadäti sva-padäntikam
I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes
with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him.
When will Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé Prabhupäda, who has established within this
material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me
shelter under his lotus feet? [Çré Guru Praëäma]
vande 'haà çré-guroù çré-yuta-pada-kamalaà çré-gurun vaiñëaväàç ca
çré-rüpaà sägrajätaà saha-gaëa-raghunäthänvitaà taà sa-jévam
sädvaitaà sävadhütaà parijana-sahitaà kåñëa-caitanya-devaà
çré-rädhä-kåñëa-pädän saha-gaëa-lalitä-çré-viçäkhänvitäàç ca
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and
unto the feet of all Vaiñëavas. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus
feet of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé along with his elder brother Sanätana Gosvämé, as


--- Page 18 ---
18
well as Raghunätha Däsa and Raghunätha Bhaööa, Gopäla Bhaööa, and Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kåñëa Caitanya and
Lord Nityänanda along with Advaita Äcärya, Gadädhara, Çréväsa, and other
associates. I offer my respectful obeisances to Çrématé Rädhäräëé and Çré Kåñëa
along with Their associates, Çré Lalitä and Viçäkhä. [Maìgaläcaraëa]
he kåñëa karuëä-sindho déna-bandho jagat-pate
gopeça gopikä-känta rädhä-känta namo 'stu te
O my dear Kåñëa, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of
creation. You are the master of the gopés and the lover of Rädhäräëé. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You. [Çré Kåñëa Praëäma]
tapta-käïcana-gauräìgi rädhe våndävaneçvari
våñabhänu-sute devi praëamämi hari-priye
I offer my respects to Rädhäräëé whose bodily complexion is like molten gold
and who is the Queen of Våndävana. You are the daughter of King Våñabhänu,
and You are very dear to Lord Kåñëa. [Çré Rädhä Praëäma]
väïchä-kalpa-tarubhyaç ca kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca
patitänäà pävanebhyo vaiñëavebhyo namo namaù
[Vaiñëava Praëäma]
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiñëava devotees of the Lord who
can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees, and who are full of
compassion for the fallen souls.
çré kåñëa caitanya prabhu nityänanda
çré advaita gadädhara çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda
[purport]
I offer my obeisances to Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityänanda, Çré Advaita,
Gadädhara, Çréväsa and all others in the line of devotion.


--- Page 19 ---
19
hare kåñëa, hare kåñëa, kåñëa kåñëa, hare hare
hare räma, hare räma, räma räma, hare hare.
Bhagavad-gétä is also known as Gétopaniñad. It is the essence of Vedic
knowledge and one of the most important Upaniñads in Vedic literature. Of
course there are many commentaries in English on the Bhagavad-gétä, and one
may question the necessity for another one. This present edition can be
explained in the following way. Recently an American lady asked me to
recommend an English translation of Bhagavad-gétä. Of course in America
there are so many editions of Bhagavad-gétä available in English, but as far as I
have seen, not only in America but also in India, none of them can be strictly
said to be authoritative because in almost every one of them the commentator
has expressed his own opinions without touching the spirit of Bhagavad-gétä as
it is.
The spirit of Bhagavad-gétä is mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä itself. It is just
like this: if we want to take a particular medicine, then we have to follow the
directions written on the label. We cannot take the medicine according to our
own whim or the direction of a friend. It must be taken according to the
directions on the label or the directions given by a physician. Similarly,
Bhagavad-gétä should be taken or accepted as it is directed by the speaker
himself. The speaker of Bhagavad-gétä is Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is mentioned on
every page of Bhagavad-gétä [2.2] as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Bhagavän. Of course the word "bhagavän" sometimes refers to any powerful
person or any powerful demigod, and certainly here Bhagavän designates Lord
Çré Kåñëa as a great personality, but at the same time we should know that Lord
Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as is confirmed by all great
äcäryas (spiritual masters) like Çaìkaräcärya, Rämänujäcärya, Madhväcärya,
Nimbärka Svämé, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and many other authorities of
Vedic knowledge in India. The Lord Himself also establishes Himself as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the Bhagavad-gétä, and He is accepted as


--- Page 20 ---
20
such in the Brahma-saàhitä and all the Puräëas, especially the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, known as the Bhägavata Puräëa (Kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam). Therefore we should take Bhagavad-gétä as it is directed by the
Personality of Godhead Himself.
In the Fourth Chapter of the Gétä the Lord says:
(1) imaà vivasvate yogaà proktavän aham avyayam
vivasvän manave präha manur ikñväkave 'bravét
(2) evaà paramparä-präptam imaà räjarñayo viduù
sa käleneha mahatä yogo nañöaù parantapa
(3) sa eväyaà mayä te 'dya yogaù proktaù purätanaù
bhakto 'si me sakhä ceti rahasyaà hy etad uttamam
Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-gétä,
was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it to Manu, and
Manu explained it to Ikñväku, and in that way, by disciplic succession, one
speaker after another, this yoga system has been coming down. But in the
course of time it has become lost. Consequently the Lord has to speak it again,
this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra.
He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because he is
His devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-gétä is a
treatise which is especially meant for the devotee of the Lord. There are three
classes of transcendentalists, namely the jïäné, the yogé and the bhakta, or the
impersonalist, the meditator and the devotee. Here the Lord clearly tells
Arjuna that He is making him the first receiver of a new paramparä (disciplic
succession) because the old succession was broken. It was the Lord's wish,
therefore, to establish another paramparä in the same line of thought that was
coming down from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teaching
be distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authority in
understanding the Bhagavad-gétä. So we see that Bhagavad-gétä is instructed to


--- Page 21 ---
21
Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of the Lord, a direct student of
Kåñëa, and His intimate friend. Therefore Bhagavad-gétä is best understood by
a person who has qualities similar to Arjuna's. That is to say he must be a
devotee in a direct relationship with the Lord. As soon as one becomes a
devotee of the Lord, he also has a direct relationship with the Lord. That is a
very elaborate subject matter, but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different
ways:
1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;
3. One may be a devotee as a friend;
4. One may be a devotee as a parent;
5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.
Arjuna was in a relationship with the Lord as friend. Of course there is a
gulf of difference between this friendship and the friendship found in the
material world. This is transcendental friendship which cannot be had by
everyone. Of course everyone has a particular relationship with the Lord, and
that relationship is evoked by the perfection of devotional service. But in the
present status of our life, we have not only forgotten the Supreme Lord, but we
have forgotten our eternal relationship with the Lord. Every living being, out
of many, many billions and trillions of living beings, has a particular
relationship with the Lord eternally. That is called svarüpa. By the process of
devotional service, one can revive that svarüpa, and that stage is called
svarüpa-siddhi—perfection of one's constitutional position. So Arjuna was a
devotee, and he was in touch with the Supreme Lord in friendship.
How Arjuna accepted this Bhagavad-gétä should be noted. His manner of
acceptance is given in the Tenth Chapter.
(12) arjuna uväca


--- Page 22 ---
22
paraà brahma paraà dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
(13) ähus tväm åñayaù sarve devarñir näradas tathä
asito devalo vyäsaù svayaà caiva bravéñi me
(14) sarvam etad åtaà manye yan mäà vadasi keçava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktià vidur devä na dänaväù
"Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode
and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal Divine Person. You are the
primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and
all-pervading beauty. All the great sages like Närada, Asita, Devala, and Vyäsa
proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me. O Kåñëa, I
totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the gods nor demons,
O Lord, know Thy personality." (Bg. 10.12-14).
After hearing Bhagavad-gétä from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna accepted Kåñëa as Paraà Brahma, the Supreme Brahman. Every living
being is Brahman, but the supreme living being, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman. Paraà dhäma means that He is the
supreme rest or abode of everything, pavitram means that He is pure, untainted
by material contamination, puruñam means that He is the supreme enjoyer,
divyam, transcendental, ädi-devam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ajam,
the unborn, and vibhum, the greatest, the all-pervading.
Now one may think that because Kåñëa was the friend of Arjuna, Arjuna
was telling Him all this by way of flattery, but Arjuna, just to drive out this
kind of doubt from the minds of the readers of Bhagavad-gétä, substantiates
these praises in the next verse when he says that Kåñëa is accepted as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead not only by himself but by authorities like the
sage Närada, Asita, Devala, Vyäsadeva and so on. These are great personalities
who distribute the Vedic knowledge as it is accepted by all äcäryas. Therefore
Arjuna tells Kåñëa that he accepts whatever He says to be completely perfect.


--- Page 23 ---
23
Sarvam etad åtaà manye [14]: "I accept everything You say to be true." Arjuna
also says that the personality of the Lord is very difficult to understand and
that He cannot be known even by the great demigods. This means that the
Lord cannot even be known by personalities greater than human beings. So
how can a human being understand Çré Kåñëa without becoming His devotee?
Therefore Bhagavad-gétä should be taken up in a spirit of devotion. One
should not think that he is equal to Kåñëa, nor should he think that Kåñëa is an
ordinary personality or even a very great personality. Lord Çré Kåñëa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, at least theoretically, according to the
statements of Bhagavad-gétä or the statements of Arjuna, the person who is
trying to understand the Bhagavad-gétä. We should therefore at least
theoretically accept Çré Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
with that submissive spirit we can understand the Bhagavad-gétä. Unless one
reads the Bhagavad-gétä in a submissive spirit, it is very difficult to understand
Bhagavad-gétä because it is a great mystery.
Just what is the Bhagavad-gétä? The purpose of Bhagavad-gétä is to deliver
mankind from the nescience of material existence. Every man is in difficulty in
so many ways, as Arjuna also was in difficulty in having to fight the Battle of
Kurukñetra. Arjuna surrendered unto Çré Kåñëa, and consequently this
Bhagavad-gétä was spoken. Not only Arjuna, but every one of us is full of
anxieties because of this material existence. Our very existence is in the
atmosphere of nonexistence. Actually we are not meant to be threatened by
nonexistence. Our existence is eternal. But somehow or other we are put into
asat. Asat refers to that which does not exist.
Out of so many human beings who are suffering, there are a few who are
actually inquiring about their position, as to what they are, why they are put
into this awkward position and so on. Unless one is awakened to this position
of questioning his suffering, unless he realizes that he doesn't want suffering
but rather wants to make a solution to all sufferings, then one is not to be
considered a perfect human being. Humanity begins when this sort of inquiry


--- Page 24 ---
24
is awakened in one's mind. In the Brahma-sütra this inquiry is called
"brahma-jijïäsä." Every activity of the human being is to be considered a failure
unless he inquires about the nature of the Absolute. Therefore those who begin
to question why they are suffering or where they came from and where they
shall go after death are proper students for understanding Bhagavad-gétä. The
sincere student should also have a firm respect for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such a student was Arjuna.
Lord Kåñëa descends specifically to reestablish the real purpose of life when
man forgets that purpose. Even then, out of many, many human beings who
awaken, there may be one who actually enters the spirit of understanding his
position, and for him this Bhagavad-gétä is spoken. Actually we are all followed
by the tiger of nescience, but the Lord is very merciful upon living entities,
especially human beings. To this end He spoke the Bhagavad-gétä, making His
friend Arjuna His student.
Being an associate of Lord Kåñëa, Arjuna was above all ignorance, but
Arjuna was put into ignorance on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra just to question
Lord Kåñëa about the problems of life so that the Lord could explain them for
the benefit of future generations of human beings and chalk out the plan of
life. Then man could act accordingly and perfect the mission of human life.
The subject of the Bhagavad-gétä entails the comprehension of five basic
truths. First of all, the science of God [4.2] is explained and then the
constitutional position of the living entities, jévas [15.7]. There is éçvara [18.61],
which means controller, and there are jévas, the living entities which are
controlled. If a living entity says that he is not controlled but that he is free,
then he is insane. The living being is controlled in every respect, at least in his
conditioned life. So in the Bhagavad-gétä the subject matter deals with the
éçvara, the supreme controller, and the jévas, the controlled living entities.
Prakåti (material nature) [3.5] and time (the duration of existence of the whole
universe or the manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity) are also
discussed. The cosmic manifestation is full of different activities. All living


--- Page 25 ---
25
entities are engaged in different activities. From Bhagavad-gétä we must learn
what God is, what the living entities are, what prakrti is, what the cosmic
manifestation is and how it is controlled by time, and what the activities of the
living entities are.
Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gétä it is established that
the Supreme Godhead, or Kåñëa, or Brahman, or supreme controller, or
Paramätmä—you may use whatever name you like—is the greatest of all. The
living beings are in quality like the supreme controller. For instance, the Lord
has control over the universal affairs, over material nature, etc., as will be
explained in the later chapters of Bhagavad-gétä. Material nature is not
independant. She is acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord
Kåñëa says, "Prakåti is working under My direction." [9.10] When we see
wonderful things happening in the cosmic nature, we should know that behind
this cosmic manifestation there is a controller. Nothing could be manifested
without being controlled. It is childish not to consider the controller. For
instance, a child may think that an automobile is quite wonderful to be able to
run without a horse or other animal pulling it, but a sane man knows the
nature of the automobile's engineering arrangement. He always knows that
behind the machinery there is a man, a driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is a
driver under whose direction everything is working. Now the jévas, or the
living entities, have been accepted by the Lord, as we will note in the later
chapters, as His parts and parcels. A particle of gold is also gold, a drop of water
from the ocean is also salty, and similarly, we the living entities, being part and
parcel of the supreme controller, ésvara, or Bhagavän, Lord Çré Kåñëa, have all
the qualities of the Supreme Lord in minute quantity because we are minute
éçvaras, subordinate éçvaras. We are trying to control nature, as presently we
are trying to control space or planets, and this tendency to control is there
because it is in Kåñëa. But although we have a tendency to lord it over material
nature, we should know that we are not the supreme controller. This is
explained in Bhagavad-gétä.


--- Page 26 ---
26
What is material nature? This is also explained in Gétä as inferior prakåti,
inferior nature. The living entity is explained as the superior prakåti. Prakåti is
always under control, whether inferior or superior. Prakåti is female, and she is
controlled by the Lord just as the activities of a wife are controlled by the
husband. Prakåti is always subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the
predominator. The living entities and material nature are both predominated,
controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gétä, the living entities,
although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to be considered prakåti.
This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter, fifth verse of Bhagavad-gétä:
"Apareyam itas tv anyäm." "This prakåti is My lower nature." "Prakåtià viddhi me
paräm jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho yayedaà dhäryate jagat." And beyond this there
is another prakåti: jéva-bhütäm, the living entity.
Prakåti itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of goodness, the
mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes there is
eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature and under the
control and purview of eternal time there are activities which are called karma.
These activities are being carried out from time immemorial, and we are
suffering or enjoying the fruits of our activities. For instance, suppose I am a
businessman and have worked very hard with intelligence and have amassed a
great bank balance. Then I am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my
money in business; then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we enjoy
the results of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.
Éçvara (the Supreme Lord), jéva (the living entity), prakåti (nature), eternal
time and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-gétä. Out of these
five, the Lord, the living entities, material nature and time are eternal. The
manifestation of prakåti may be temporary, but it is not false. Some
philosophers say that the manifestation of material nature is false, but
according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gétä or according to the philosophy of
the Vaiñëavas, this is not so. The manifestation of the world is not accepted as
false; it is accepted as real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which


--- Page 27 ---
27
moves across the sky, or the coming of the rainy season which nourishes grains.
As soon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away, all the
crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, this material
manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for a while and then
disappears. Such are the workings of prakåti But this cycle is working eternally.
Therefore prakrti is eternal; it is not false. The Lord refers to this [7.4] as "My
prakåti." This material nature is the separated energy of the Supreme Lord, and
similarly the living entities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord, but they
are not separated. They are eternally related. So the Lord, the living entity,
material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal. However, the
other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karma may be very old indeed.
We are suffering or enjoying the results of our activities from time immemorial,
but we can change the results of our karma, or our activity, and this change
depends on the perfection of our knowledge. We are engaged in various
activities. Undoubtedly we do not know what sort of activities we should adopt
to gain relief from the actions and reactions of all these activities, but this is
also explained in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The position of ésvara is that of supreme consciousness. The jévas, or the
living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are also conscious.
Both the living entity and material nature are explained as prakåti, the energy
of the Supreme Lord, but one of the two, the jéva, is conscious. The other
prakåti is not conscious. That is the difference. Therefore the jéva-prakåti is
called superior because the jéva has consciousness which is similar to the Lord's.
The Lord's is supreme consciousness, however, and one should not claim that
the jéva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious. The living being cannot
be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection, and the theory that he
can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he may be, but he is not perfectly or
supremely conscious.
The distinction between the jéva and the éçvara will be explained in the
Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord is kñetra-jïaù, conscious, as is


--- Page 28 ---
28
the living being, but the living being is conscious of his particular body,
whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies. Because He lives in the heart of
every living being, He is conscious of the psychic movements of the particular
jévas. We should not forget this. It is also explained that the Paramätmä, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is living in everyone's heart as éçvara, as the
controller, and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires [18.61]. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes a
determination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in the acts and
reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type of body, he enters
another type of body, as we put on and take off old clothes. As the soul thus
migrates, he suffers the actions and reactions of his past activities. These
activities can be changed when the living being is in the mode of goodness, in
sanity, and understands what sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so,
then all the actions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.
Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of the five items
(éçvara, jéva, prakåti time and karma) four are eternal, whereas karma is not
eternal.
The supreme conscious éçvara is similar to the living entity in this way: both
the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entity are transcendental.
It is not that consciousness is generated by the association of matter. That is a
mistaken idea. The theory that consciousness develops under certain
circumstances of material combination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gétä.
Consciousness may be pervertedly reflected by the covering of material
circumstances, just as light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a
certain color, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected. Lord
Kåñëa says, "mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù." When He descends into the material
universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If He were so affected,
He would be unfit to speak on transcendental matters as He does in the
Bhagavad-gétä. One cannot say anything about the transcendental world
without being free from materially contaminated consciousness. So the Lord is
not materially contaminated. Our consciousness, at the present moment,


--- Page 29 ---
29
however, is materially contaminated. The Bhagavad-gétä [3.9] teaches that we
have to purify this materially contaminated consciousness. In pure
consciousness, our actions will be dovetailed to the will of éçvara, and that will
make us happy. It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, our
activities are to be purified, and purified activities are called bhakti. Activities
in bhakti appear to be like ordinary activities, but they are not contaminated.
An ignorant person may see that a devotee is acting or working like an
ordinary man, but such a person with a poor fund of knowledge does not know
that the activities of the devotee or of the Lord are not contaminated by
impure consciousness or matter. They are transcendental to the three modes of
nature. We should know, however, that at this point our consciousness is
contaminated.
When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product of material
nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in the thought of bodily
conceptions cannot understand his situation. Bhagavad-gétä was spoken to
liberate one from the bodily conception of life, and Arjuna put himself in this
position in order to receive this information from the Lord. One must become
free from the bodily conception of life; that is the preliminary activity for the
transcendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to become
liberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body. Mukti or
liberation means freedom from material consciousness. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam [2.10.6] also the definition of liberation is given: Mukti
means liberation from the contaminated consciousness of this material world
and situation in pure consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä are
intended to awaken this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last
stage of the Gétä's [18.72] instructions that Kåñëa is asking Arjuna whether he is
now in purified consciousness. Purified consciousness means acting in
accordance with the instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sum and
substance of purified consciousness. Consciousness is already there because we
are part and parcel of the Lord, but for us there is the affinity of being affected


--- Page 30 ---
30
by the inferior modes. But the Lord, being the Supreme, is never affected. That
is the difference between the Supreme Lord and the conditioned souls.
What is this consciousness? This consciousness is "I am." Then what am I? In
contaminated consciousness "I am" means "I am the lord of all I survey. I am the
enjoyer." The world revolves because every living being thinks that he is the
lord and creator of the material world. Material consciousness has two psychic
divisions. One is that I am the creator, and the other is that I am the enjoyer.
But actually the Supreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer, and the
living entity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither the creator
nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and the enjoyed. For
instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the whole machine; a part of the
body cooperates with the whole body. The hands, feet, eyes, legs and so on are
all parts of the body, but they are not actually the enjoyers. The stomach is the
enjoyer. The legs move, the hands supply food, the teeth chew and all parts of
the body are engaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the
principal factor that nourishes the body's organization. Therefore everything is
given to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, and one
nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to be kept in a
healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate to feed the stomach.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and the creator, and we, as
subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperate to satisfy Him. This
cooperation will actually help us, just as food taken by the stomach will help all
other parts of the body. If the fingers of the hand think that they should take
the food themselves instead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be
frustrated. The central figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme
Lord, and the living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. The
relation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the master is fully
satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, the Supreme Lord should be
satisfied, although the tendency to become the creator and the tendency to
enjoy the material world are there also in the living entities because these
tendencies are there in the Supreme Lord who has created the manifested


--- Page 31 ---
31
cosmic world.
We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gétä that the complete whole is
comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities, the cosmic
manifestation, eternal time, and karma, or activities, and all of these are
explained in this text. All of these taken completely form the complete whole,
and the complete whole is called the Supreme Absolute Truth. The complete
whole and the complete Absolute Truth are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. All manifestations are due to His different energies. He is
the complete whole.
It is also explained in the Gétä that impersonal Brahman is also subordinate
to the complete. Brahman is more explicitly explained in the Brahma-sütra to
be like the rays of the sunshine. The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete
realization of the absolute whole, and so also is the conception of Paramätmä in
the Twelfth Chapter. There it shall be seen that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Puruñottama, is above both impersonal Brahman and the partial
realization of Paramätmä. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is called
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha. The Brahma-saàhitä begins in this way: éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigraha/anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam. "Kåñëa is the cause of all causes. He is the primal cause,
and He is the very form of eternal being, knowledge and bliss." Impersonal
Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (being) feature. Paramätmä
realization is the realization of the cit (eternal knowledge) feature. But
realization of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is realization of all the
transcendental features: sat, cit and änanda (being, knowledge, bliss) in
complete vigraha (form).
People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be impersonal,
but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed in all Vedic
literatures. Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm. As we are all individual living
beings and have our individuality, the Supreme Absolute Truth is also, in the


--- Page 32 ---
32
ultimate issue, a person, and realization of the Personality of Godhead is
realization of all of the transcendental features. The complete whole is not
formless. If He is formless, or if He is less than any other thing, then He cannot
be the complete whole. The complete whole must have everything within our
experience and beyond our experience, otherwise it cannot be complete. The
complete whole, Personality of Godhead, has immense potencies. [Çvet. 6.8]
How Kåñëa is acting in different potencies is also explained in
Bhagavad-gétä. This phenomenal world or material world in which we are
placed is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements of which this
material universe is a temporary manifestation, according to Säìkhya
philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce complete resources which are
necessary for the maintenance and subsistence of this universe. There is
nothing extraneous; nor is there anything needed. This manifestation has its
own time fixed by the energy of the supreme whole, and when its time is
complete, these temporary manifestations will be annihilated by the complete
arrangement of the complete. There is complete facility for the small complete
units, namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts of
incompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the complete.
So Bhagavad-gétä contains the complete knowledge of Vedic wisdom.
All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to be
complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of an animal, and
according to småti or Vedic injunction, if one touches the stool of an animal he
has to take a bath to purify himself. But in the Vedic scriptures cow dung is
considered to be a purifying agent. One might consider this to be
contradictory, but it is accepted because it is Vedic injunction, and indeed by
accepting this, one will not commit a mistake; subsequently it has been proved
by modern science that cow dung contains all antiseptic properties. So Vedic
knowledge is complete because it is above all doubts and mistakes, and
Bhagavad-gétä is the essence of all Vedic knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is


--- Page 33 ---
33
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. We have to
accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in Bhagavad-gétä, by
the paramparä disciplic succession. We have to receive knowledge from the
proper source in disciplic succession beginning with the supreme spiritual
master, the Lord Himself, and handed down to a succession of spiritual masters.
Arjuna, the student who took lessons from Lord Çré Kåñëa, accepts everything
that He says without contradicting Him. One is not allowed to accept one
portion of Bhagavad-gétä and not another. No. We must accept Bhagavad-gétä
without interpretation, without deletion and without our own whimsical
participation in the matter. The Gétä should he taken as the most perfect
presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is received from
transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by the Lord Himself.
The words spoken by the Lord are different from words spoken by a person of
the mundane world who is infected with four defects. A mundaner 1) is sure to
commit mistakes, 2) is invariably illusioned, 3) has the tendency to cheat
others and 4) is limited by imperfect senses. With these four imperfections, one
cannot deliver perfect information of all-pervading knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It was
imparted unto the heart of Brahmä, the first created living being, and Brahmä
in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons and disciples, as he
originally received it from the Lord. The Lord is pürëam, all-perfect, and there
is no possibility of His becoming subjected to the laws of material nature. One
should therefore be intelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only
proprietor of everything in the universe and that He is the original creator, the
creator of Brahmä. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed as
prapitämaha because Brahmä is addressed as pitämaha, the grandfather, and He
is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim to be the proprietor of
anything; one should accept only things which are set aside for him by the
Lord as his quota for his maintenance.
There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things which


--- Page 34 ---
34
are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä. In the
beginning, Arjuna decided that he should not fight in the Battle of
Kurukñetra. This was his own decision. Arjuna told the Lord that it was not
possible for him to enjoy the kingdom after killing his own kinsmen. This
decision was based on the body because he was thinking that the body was
himself and that his bodily relations or expansions were his brothers, nephews,
brothers-in-law, grandfathers and so on. He was thinking in this way to satisfy
his bodily demands. Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by the Lord just to change this
view, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directions of the Lord
when he says, "kariñye vacanaà tava." "I shall act according to Thy word."
In this world man is not meant to toil like hogs. He must be intelligent to
realize the importance of human life and refuse to act like an ordinary animal.
A human being should realize the aim of his life, and this direction is given in
all Vedic literatures, and the essence is given in Bhagavad-gétä. Vedic literature
is meant for human beings, not for animals. Animals can kill other living
animals, and there is no question of sin on their part, but if a man kills an
animal for the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste, he must be responsible for
breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä [7.12] it is clearly explained
that there are three kinds of activities according to the different modes of
nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and of ignorance. Similarly, there
are three kinds of eatables also: eatables in goodness, passion and ignorance.
All of this is clearly described, and if we properly utilize the instructions of
Bhagavad-gétä, then our whole life will become purified, and ultimately we will
be able to reach the destination which is beyond this material sky. [15.6]
That destination is called the sanätana sky, the eternal spiritual sky. In this
material world we find that everything is temporary. It comes into being, stays
for some time, produces some by-products, dwindles and then vanishes. That is
the law of the material world, whether we use as an example this body, or a
piece of fruit or anything. But beyond this temporary world there is another
world of which we have information. This world consists of another nature


--- Page 35 ---
35
which is sanätana, eternal. Jéva is also described as sanätana, eternal, and the
Lord is also described as sanätana in the Eleventh Chapter. We have an
intimate relationship with the Lord, and because we are all qualitatively
one—the sanätana-dhäma, or sky, the sanätana Supreme Personality and the
sanätana living entities—the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gétä is to revive our
sanätana occupation, or sanätana-dharma, which is the eternal occupation of
the living entity. We are temporarily engaged in different activities, but all of
these activities can be purified when we give up all these temporary activities
and take up the activities which are prescribed by the Supreme Lord. That is
called our pure life.
The Supreme Lord and His transcendental abode are both sanätana, as are
the living entities, and the combined association of the Supreme Lord and the
living entities in the sanätana abode is the perfection of human life. The Lord
is very kind to the living entities because they are His sons. Lord Kåñëa
declares in Bhagavad-gétä [14.4], "sarva-yoniñu...ahaà béja-pradaù pitä." "I am the
father of all." Of course there are all types of living entities according to their
various karmas, but here the Lord claims that He is the father of all of them.
Therefore the Lord descends to reclaim all of these fallen, conditioned souls to
call them back to the sanätana eternal sky so that the sanätana living entities
may regain their eternal sanätana positions in eternal association with the
Lord. The Lord comes Himself in different incarnations, or He sends His
confidential servants as sons or His associates or äcäryas to reclaim the
conditioned souls.
Therefore, sanätana-dharma does not refer to any sectarian process of
religion. It is the eternal function of the eternal living entities in relationship
with the eternal Supreme Lord. Sanätana-dharma refers, as stated previously,
to the eternal occupation of the living entity. Rämänujäcärya has explained
the word sanätana as "that which has neither beginning nor end," so when we
speak of sanätana-dharma, we must take it for granted on the authority of Çré
Rämänujäcärya that it has neither beginning nor end.


--- Page 36 ---
36
The English word "religion" is a little different from sanätana-dharma.
Religion conveys the idea of faith, and faith may change. One may have faith
in a particular process, and he may change this faith and adopt another, but
sanätana-dharma refers to that activity which cannot be changed. For
instance, liquidity cannot be taken from water, nor can heat be taken from
fire. Similarly, the eternal function of the eternal living entity cannot be taken
from the living entity. Sanätana-dharma is eternally integral with the living
entity. When we speak of sanätana-dharma, therefore, we must take it for
granted on the authority of Çré Rämänujäcärya that it has neither beginning
nor end. That which has neither end nor beginning must not be sectarian, for
it cannot be limited by any boundaries. Yet those belonging to some sectarian
faith will wrongly consider that sanätana-dharma is also sectarian, but if we go
deeply into the matter and consider it in the light of modern science, it is
possible for us to see that sanätana-dharma is the business of all the people of
the world—nay, of all the living entities of the universe.
Non-sanätana religious faith may have some beginning in the annals of
human history, but there is no beginning to the history of sanätana-dharma
because it remains eternally with the living entities. Insofar as the living
entities are concerned, the authoritative çästras state that the living entity has
neither birth nor death. In the Gétä it is stated that the living entity is never
born, and he never dies. He is eternal and indestructible, and he continues to
live after the destruction of his temporary material body. In reference to the
concept of sanätana-dharma, we must try to understand the concept of religion
from the Sanskrit root meaning of the word. Dharma refers to that which is
constantly existing with the particular object. We conclude that there is heat
and light along with the fire; without heat and light, there is no meaning to the
word fire. Similarly, we must discover the essential part of the living being, that
part which is his constant companion. That constant companion is his eternal
quality, and that eternal quality is his eternal religion.
When Sanätana Gosvämé asked Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu about the


--- Page 37 ---
37
svarüpa of every living being, the Lord replied that the svarüpa or
constitutional position of the living being is the rendering of service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we analyze this statement of Lord
Caitanya, we can easily see that every living being is constantly engaged in
rendering service to another living being. A living being serves other living
beings in two capacities. By doing so, the living entity enjoys life. The lower
animals serve human beings as servants serve their master. A serves B master,
B serves C master and C serves D master and so on. Under these
circumstances, we can see that one friend serves another friend, the mother
serves the son, the wife serves the husband, the husband serves the wife and so
on. If we go on searching in this spirit, it will be seen that there is no exception
in the society of living beings to the activity of service. The politician presents
his manifesto for the public to convince them of his capacity for service. The
voters therefore give the politician their valuable votes, thinking that he will
render valuable service to society. The shopkeeper serves the customer, and the
artisan serves the capitalist. The capitalist serves the family, and the family
serves the state in the terms of the eternal capacity of the eternal living being.
In this way we can see that no living being is exempt from rendering service to
other living beings, and therefore we can safely conclude that service is the
constant companion of the living being and that the rendering of service is the
eternal religion of the living being.
Yet man professes to belong to a particular type of faith with reference to
particular time and circumstance and thus claims to be a Hindu, Muslim,
Christian, Buddhist or any other sect. Such designations are
non-sanätana-dharma. A Hindu may change his faith to become a Muslim, or a
Muslim may change his faith to become a Hindu, or a Christian may change
his faith and so on. But in all circumstances the change of religious faith does
not effect the eternal occupation of rendering service to others. The Hindu,
Muslim or Christian in all circumstances is servant of someone. Thus, to
profess a particular type of sect is not to profess one's sanätana-dharma. The


--- Page 38 ---
38
rendering of service is sanätana-dharma.
Factually we are related to the Supreme Lord in service. The Supreme Lord
is the supreme enjoyer, and we living entities are His servitors. We are created
for His enjoyment, and if we participate in that eternal enjoyment with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we become happy. We cannot become happy
otherwise. It is not possible to be happy independantly, just as no one part of
the body can be happy without cooperating with the stomach. It is not possible
for the living entity to be happy without rendering transcendental loving
service unto the Supreme Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gétä, worship of different demigods or rendering service to
them is not approved. It is stated in the Seventh Chapter, twentieth verse:
kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya prakåtyä niyatäù svayä
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods
and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their
own natures." (Bg. 7.20) Here it is plainly said that those who are directed by
lust worship the demigods and not the Supreme Lord Kåñëa. When we mention
the name Kåñëa, we do not refer to any sectarian name. Kåñëa means the
highest pleasure, and it is confirmed that the Supreme Lord is the reservoir or
storehouse of all pleasure. We are all hankering after pleasure. Änandamayo
'bhyäsät. (Vs. 1.1.12) The living entities, like the Lord, are full of consciousness,
and they are after happiness. The Lord is perpetually happy, and if the living
entities associate with the Lord, cooperate with Him and take part in His
association, then they also become happy.
The Lord descends to this mortal world to show His pastimes in Våndävana,
which are full of happiness. When Lord Çré Kåñëa was in Våndävana, His
activities with His cowherd boy friends, with His damsel friends, with the
inhabitants of Våndävana and with the cows were all full of happiness. The


--- Page 39 ---
39
total population of Våndävana knew nothing but Kåñëa. But Lord Kåñëa even
discouraged His father Nanda Mahäräja from worshiping the demigod Indra
because He wanted to establish the fact that people need not worship any
demigod. They need only worship the Supreme Lord because their ultimate
goal is to return to His abode.
The abode of Lord Çré Kåñëa is described in the Bhagavad-gétä, Fifteenth
Chapter, sixth verse:
na tad bhäsayate süryo na çaçäìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama
"That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by electricity.
And anyone who reaches it never comes back to this material world." (Bg. 15.6)
This verse gives a description of that eternal sky. Of course we have a
material conception of the sky, and we think of it in relationship to the sun,
moon, stars and so on, but in this verse the Lord states that in the eternal sky
there is no need for the sun nor for the moon nor fire of any kind because the
spiritual sky is already illuminated by the brahmajyoti, the rays emanating from
the Supreme Lord. We are trying with difficulty to reach other planets, but it is
not difficult to understand the abode of the Supreme Lord. This abode is
referred to as Goloka. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is beautifully described: Goloka
eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù. The Lord resides eternally in His abode Goloka,
yet He can be approached from this world, and to this end the Lord comes to
manifest His real form, sac-cid-änanda-vigraha. When He manifests this form,
there is no need for our imagining what He looks like. To discourage such
imaginative speculation, He descends and exhibits Himself as He is, as
Çyämasundara. Unfortunately, the less intelligent deride Him because He
comes as one of us and plays with us as a human being. But because of this we
should not consider that the Lord is one of us. It is by His potency that He
presents Himself in His real form before us and displays His pastimes, which
are prototypes of those pastimes found in His abode.


--- Page 40 ---
40
In the effulgent rays of the spiritual sky there are innumerable planets
floating. The brahmajyoti emanates from the supreme abode, Kåñëaloka, and
the änandamaya-cinmaya planets, which are not material, float in those rays.
The Lord says, na tad bhäsayate süryo na çaçäìko na pävakaù yad gatvä na
nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama. One who can approach that spiritual sky
is not required to descend again to the material sky. In the material sky, even if
we approach the highest planet (Brahmaloka), what to speak of the moon, we
will find the same conditions of life, namely birth, death, disease and old age.
No planet in the material universe is free from these four principles of material
existence. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä, äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù
punar ävartino 'rjuna. The living entities are traveling from one planet to
another, not by mechanical arrangement but by a spiritual process. This is also
mentioned: yänti deva-vratä devän pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù. No mechanical
arrangement is necessary if we want interplanetary travel. The Gétä instructs:
yänti deva-vratä devän. The moon, the sun and higher planets are called
svargaloka. There are three different statuses of planets: higher, middle and
lower planetary systems. The earth belongs to the middle planetary system.
Bhagavad-gétä informs us how to travel to the higher planetary systems
(devaloka) with a very simple formula: yänti deva-vratä devän. One need only
worship the particular demigod of that particular planet and in that way go to
the moon, the sun or any of the higher planetary systems.
Yet Bhagavad-gétä does not advise us to go to any of the planets in this
material world because even if we go to Brahmaloka, the highest planet,
through some sort of mechanical contrivance by maybe traveling for forty
thousand years (and who would live that long?), we will still find the material
inconveniences of birth, death, disease and old age. But one who wants to
approach the supreme planet, Kåñëaloka, or any of the other planets within the
spiritual sky, will not meet with these material inconveniences. Amongst all of
the planets in the spiritual sky there is one supreme planet called Goloka
Våndävana, which is the original planet in the abode of the original


--- Page 41 ---
41
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. All of this information is given in
Bhagavad-gétä, and we are given through its instruction information how to
leave the material world and begin a truly blissful life in the spiritual sky.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, the real picture of the
material world is given. It is said there:
ürdhva-mülam adhaù-çäkham açvatthaà prähur avyayam
chandäàsi yasya parëäni yas taà veda sa veda-vit
"The Supreme Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots upward and
its branches down, and the Vedic hymns are its leaves. One who knows this
tree is the knower of the Vedas." (Bg. 15.1) Here the material world is described
as a tree whose roots are upwards and branches are below. We have experience
of a tree whose roots are upward: if one stands on the bank of a river or any
reservoir of water, he can see that the trees reflected in the water are upside
down. The branches go downward and the roots upward. Similarly, this
material world is a reflection of the spiritual world. The material world is but a
shadow of reality. In the shadow there is no reality or substantiality, but from
the shadow we can understand that there is substance and reality. In the desert
there is no water, but the mirage suggests that there is such a thing as water. In
the material world there is no water, there is no happiness, but the real water of
actual happiness is there in the spiritual world.
The Lord suggests that we attain the spiritual world in the following
manner: [Bg. 15.5]
nirmäna-mohä jita-saìga-doñä
adhyätma-nityä vinivåtta-kämäù
dvandvair vimuktäù sukha-duùkha-saàjïair
gacchanty amüòhäù padam avyayaà tat.
That padam avyayam or eternal kingdom can be reached by one who is
nirmäna-moha. What does this mean? We are after designations. Someone


--- Page 42 ---
42
wants to become a son, someone wants to become Lord, someone wants to
become the president or a rich man or a king or something else. As long as we
are attached to these designations, we are attached to the body because
designations belong to the body. But we are not these bodies, and realizing this
is the first stage in spiritual realization. We are associated with the three modes
of material nature, but we must become detached through devotional service to
the Lord. If we are not attached to devotional service to the Lord, then we
cannot become detached from the modes of material nature. Designations and
attachments are due to our lust and desire, our wanting to lord it over the
material nature. As long as we do not give up this propensity of lording it over
material nature, there is no possibility of returning to the kingdom of the
Supreme, the sanätana-dhäma. That eternal kingdom, which is never
destroyed, can be approached by one who is not bewildered by the attractions
of false material enjoyments, who is situated in the service of the Supreme
Lord. One so situated can easily approach that supreme abode.
Elsewhere in the Gétä it is stated:
avyakto 'kñara ity uktas tam ähuù paramäà gatim
yaà präpya na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama.
Avyakta means unmanifested. Not even all of the material world is manifested
before us. Our senses are so imperfect that we cannot even see all of the stars
within this material universe. In Vedic literature we can receive much
information about all the planets, and we can believe it or not believe it. All of
the important planets are described in Vedic literatures, especially
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the spiritual world, which is beyond this material sky,
is described as avyakta, unmanifested. One should desire and hanker after that
supreme kingdom, for when one attains that kingdom, he does not have to
return to this material world.
Next, one may raise the question of how one goes about approaching that
abode of the Supreme Lord. Information of this is given in the Eighth Chapter.


--- Page 43 ---
43
It is said there:
anta-käle ca mäm eva smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävam yäti nästy atra saàçayaù
"Anyone who quits his body, at the end of life, remembering Me, attains
immediately to My nature; and there is no doubt of this." (Bg. 8.5) One who
thinks of Kåñëa at the time of his death goes to Kåñëa. One must remember the
form of Kåñëa; if he quits his body thinking of this form, he approaches the
spiritual kingdom. Mad-bhävaà refers to the supreme nature of the Supreme
Being. The Supreme Being is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha—eternal, full of
knowledge and bliss. Our present body is not sac-cid-änanda. It is asat, not sat.
It is not eternal; it is perishable. It is not cit, full of knowledge, but it is full of
ignorance. We have no knowledge of the spiritual kingdom, nor do we even
have perfect knowledge of this material world where there are so many things
unknown to us. The body is also niränanda; instead of being full of bliss it is
full of misery. All of the miseries we experience in the material world arise
from the body, but one who leaves this body thinking of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead at once attains a sac-cid-änanda body, as is promised in
this fifth verse of the Eighth Chapter where Lord Kåñëa says, "He attains My
nature."
The process of quitting this body and getting another body in the material
world is also organized. A man dies after it has been decided what form of body
he will have in the next life. Higher authorities, not the living entity himself,
make this decision. According to our activities in this life, we either rise or
sink. This life is a preparation for the next life. If we can prepare, therefore, in
this life to get promotion to the kingdom of God, then surely, after quitting
this material body, we will attain a spiritual body just like the Lord.
As explained before, there are different kinds of transcendentalists, the
brahmavädi paramätmävädi and the devotee, and, as mentioned, in the
brahmajyoti (spiritual sky) there are innumerable spiritual planets. The number


--- Page 44 ---
44
of these planets is far, far greater than all of the planets of this material world.
This material world has been approximated as only one quarter of the creation.
In this material segment there are millions and billions of universes with
trillions of planets and suns, stars and moons. But this whole material creation
is only a fragment of the total creation. Most of the creation is in the spiritual
sky. One who desires to merge into the existence of the Supreme Brahman is at
once transferred to the brahmajyoti of the Supreme Lord and thus attains the
spiritual sky. The devotee, who wants to enjoy the association of the Lord,
enters into the Vaikuëöha planets, which are innumerable, and the Supreme
Lord by His plenary expansions as Näräyaëa with four hands and with
different names like Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Govinda, etc., associates with
him there. Therefore at the end of life the transcendentalists either think of
the brahmajyoti, the Paramätmä or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa. In all cases they enter into the spiritual sky, but only the devotee, or he
who is in personal touch with the Supreme Lord, enters into the Vaikuëöha
planets. The Lord further adds that of this "there is no doubt." This must be
believed firmly. We should not reject that which does not tally with our
imagination; our attitude should be that of Arjuna: "I believe everything that
You have said." Therefore when the Lord says that at the time of death
whoever thinks of Him as Brahman or Paramätmä or as the Personality of
Godhead certainly enters into the spiritual sky, there is no doubt about it.
There is no question of disbelieving it.
The information on how to think of the Supreme Being at the time of death
is also given in the Gétä:
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"In whatever condition one quits his present body, in his next life he will
attain to that state of being without fail." (Bg. 8.6) Material nature is a display
of one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. In the Viñëu Puräëa the total


--- Page 45 ---
45
energies of the Supreme Lord as Viñëu-çaktiù parä proktä, etc., are delineated.
The Supreme Lord has diverse and innumerable energies which are beyond our
conception; however, great learned sages or liberated souls have studied these
energies and have analyzed them into three parts. All of the energies are of
Viñëu-çakti, that is to say they are different potencies of Lord Viñëu. That
energy is parä, transcendental. Living entities also belong to the superior
energy, as has already been explained. The other energies, or material energies,
are in the mode of ignorance. At the time of death we can either remain in the
inferior energy of this material world, or we can transfer to the energy of the
spiritual world.
In life we are accustomed to thinking either of the material or the spiritual
energy. There are so many literatures which fill our thoughts with the material
energy—newspapers, novels, etc. Our thinking, which is now absorbed in these
literatures, must be transferred to the Vedic literatures. The great sages,
therefore, have written so many Vedic literatures such as the Puräëas, etc. The
Puräëas are not imaginative; they are historical records. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta there is the following verse:
mäyä mugdha jéver nähi svataù kåñëa-jïäna
jévera kåpäya kailä kåñëa veda-puräëa
(Madhya 20.122)
The forgetful living entities or conditioned souls have forgotten their
relationship with the Supreme Lord, and they are engrossed in thinking of
material activities. Just to transfer their thinking power to the spiritual sky,
Kåñëa has given a great number of Vedic literatures. First He divided the Vedas
into four, then He explained them in the Puräëas, and for less capable people
He wrote the Mahäbhärata. In the Mahäbhärata there is given the
Bhagavad-gétä. Then all Vedic literature is summarized in the Vedänta-sütra,
and for future guidance He gave a natural commentation on the Vedänta-sutra,
called Çrémad-Bhägavatam. We must always engage our minds in reading these


--- Page 46 ---
46
Vedic literatures. Just as materialists engage their minds in reading newspapers,
magazines and so many materialistic literatures, we must transfer our reading
to these literatures which are given to us by Vyäsadeva; in that way it will be
possible for us to remember the Supreme Lord at the time of death. That is the
only way suggested by the Lord, and He guarantees the result: "There is no
doubt." (Bg. 8.7)
tasmät sarveñu käleñu mäm anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir mäm evaiñyasy asaàçayaù
"Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me, and at the same time you
should continue your prescribed duty and fight. With your mind and activities
always fixed on Me, and everything engaged in Me, you will attain to Me
without any doubt."
He does not advise Arjuna to simply remember Him and give up his
occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything impractical. In this material
world, in order to maintain the body one has to work. Human society is
divided, according to work, into four divisions of social order—brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra. The brähmaëa class or intelligent class is working in one
way, the kñatriya or administrative class is working in another way, and the
mercantile class and the laborers are all tending to their specific duties. In the
human society, whether one is a laborer, merchant, warrior, administrator, or
farmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literary man, a
scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintain his existence. The
Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give up his occupation, but while
he is engaged in his occupation he should remember Kåñëa. If he doesn't
practice remembering Kåñëa while he is struggling for existence, then it will
not be possible for him to remember Kåñëa at the time of death. Lord Caitanya
also advises this. He says that one should practice remembering the Lord by
chanting the names of the Lord always. The names of the Lord and the Lord
are nondifferent. So Lord Kåñëa's instruction to Arjuna to "remember Me" [Bg.


--- Page 47 ---
47
8.7] and Lord Caitanya's injunction to always "chant the names of Lord Kåñëa"
[Çikñäñöaka 3] are the same instruction. There is no difference, because Kåñëa
and Kåñëa's name are nondifferent. In the absolute status there is no difference
between reference and referent. Therefore we have to practice remembering
the Lord always, twenty-four hours a day, by chanting His names and molding
our life's activities in such a way that we can remember Him always.
How is this possible? The äcäryas give the following example. If a married
woman is attached to another man, or if a man has an attachment for a woman
other than his wife, then the attachment is to be considered very strong. One
with such an attachment is always thinking of the loved one. The wife who is
thinking of her lover is always thinking of meeting him, even while she is
carrying out her household chores. In fact, she carries out her household work
even more carefully so her husband will not suspect her attachment. Similarly,
we should always remember the supreme lover, Çré Kåñëa, and at the same time
perform our material duties very nicely. A strong sense of love is required here.
If we have a strong sense of love for the Supreme Lord, then we can discharge
our duty and at the same time remember Him. But we have to develop that
sense of love. Arjuna, for instance, was always thinking of Kåñëa; he was the
constant companion of Kåñëa, and at the same time he was a warrior. Kåñëa did
not advise him to give up fighting and go to the forest to meditate. When Lord
Kåñëa delineates the yoga system to Arjuna, Arjuna says that the practice of
this system is not possible for him.
arjuna uväca
yo 'yaà yogas tvayä proktaù sämyena madhusüdana
etasyähaà na paçyämi caïcalatvät sthitià sthiräm
"Arjuna said, O Madhusüdana, the system of yoga which you have summarized
appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is restless and
unsteady." (Bg. 6.33)
But the Lord says:


--- Page 48 ---
48
yoginäm api sarveñäà mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga, and is
the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) So one who thinks of the Supreme Lord always is
the greatest yogé, the supermost jïäné, and the greatest devotee at the same
time. The Lord further tells Arjuna that as a kñatriya he cannot give up his
fighting, but if Arjuna fights remembering Kåñëa, then he will be able to
remember Him at the time of death. But one must be completely surrendered
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
We work not with our body, actually, but with our mind and intelligence. So
if the intelligence and the mind are always engaged in the thought of the
Supreme Lord, then naturally the senses are also engaged in His service.
Superficially, at least, the activities of the senses remain the same, but the
consciousness is changed. The Bhagavad-gétä teaches one how to absorb the
mind and intelligence in the thought of the Lord. Such absorption will enable
one to transfer himself to the kingdom of the Lord. If the mind is engaged in
Kåñëa's service, then the senses are automatically engaged in His service. This
is the art, and this is also the secret of Bhagavad-gétä: total absorption in the
thought of Çré Kåñëa.
Modern man has struggled very hard to reach the moon, but he has not
tried very hard to elevate himself spiritually. If one has fifty years of life ahead
of him, he should engage that brief time in cultivating this practice of
remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This practice is the
devotional process of:
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam
[Bhäg. 7.5.23]


--- Page 49 ---
49
These nine processes, of which the easiest is çravaëaà, hearing Bhagavad-gétä
from the realized person, will turn one to the thought of the Supreme Being.
This will lead to niçcala, remembering the Supreme Lord, and will enable one,
upon leaving the body, to attain a spiritual body which is just fit for association
with the Supreme Lord.
The Lord further says:
abhyäsa-yoga-yuktena cetasä nänya-gäminä
paramaà puruñaà divyaà yäti pärthänucintayan
"By practicing this remembering, without being deviated, thinking ever of the
Supreme Godhead, one is sure to achieve the planet of the Divine, the
Supreme Personality, O son of Kunté." (Bg. 8.8)
This is not a very difficult process. However, one must learn it from an
experienced person [MU 1.2.12], from one who is already in the practice. The
mind is always flying to this and that, but one must always practice
concentrating the mind on the form of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa or on the
sound of His name. The mind is naturally restless, going hither and thither, but
it can rest in the sound vibration of Kåñëa. One must thus meditate on
paramaà puruñaà, the Supreme Person; and thus attain Him. The ways and
the means for ultimate realization, ultimate attainment, are stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä, and the doors of this knowledge are open for everyone. No one
is barred out. All classes of men can approach the Lord by thinking of Him, for
hearing and thinking of Him is possible for everyone.
The Lord further says:
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
kià punar brähmaëäù puëyä bhaktä räjarñayas tathä


--- Page 50 ---
50
anityam asukhaà lokam imaà präpya bhajasva mäm
"O son of Påthä, anyone who will take shelter in Me, whether a woman, or a
merchant, or one born in a low family, can yet approach the supreme
destination. How much greater then are the brähmaëas, the righteous, the
devotees, and saintly kings! In this miserable world, these are fixed in
devotional service to the Lord." (Bg. 9.32-33)
Human beings even in the lower statuses of life (a merchant, a woman or a
laborer) can attain the Supreme. One does not need highly developed
intelligence. The point is that anyone who accepts the principle of bhakti-yoga
and accepts the Supreme Lord as the summum bonum of life, as the highest
target, the ultimate goal, can approach the Lord in the spiritual sky. If one
adopts the principles enunciated in Bhagavad-gétä, he can make his life perfect
and make a perfect solution to all the problems of life which arise out of the
transient nature of material existence. This is the sum and substance of the
entire Bhagavad-gétä.
In conclusion, Bhagavad-géta is a transcendental literature which one
should read very carefully. It is capable of saving one from all fear.
nehäbhikrama-näço 'sti pratyaväyo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät
"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on
this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear." (Bg. 2.40) If
one reads Bhagavad-gétä sincerely and seriously, then all of the reactions of his
past misdeeds will not react upon him. In the last portion of Bhagavad-gétä,
Lord Çré Kåñëa proclaims:
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Give up all varieties of religiousness, and just surrender unto Me; and in


--- Page 51 ---
51
return I shall protect you from all sinful reactions. Therefore, you have nothing
to fear." (Bg. 18.66) Thus the Lord takes all responsibility for one who
surrenders unto Him, and He indemnifies all the reactions of sin.
One cleanses himself daily by taking a bath in water, but one who takes his
bath only once in the sacred Ganges water of the Bhagavad-gétä cleanses away
all the dirt of material life. Because Bhagavad-gétä is spoken by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one need not read any other Vedic literature. One
need only attentively and regularly hear and read Bhagavad-gétä. In the present
age, mankind is so absorbed with mundane activities that it is not possible to
read all of the Vedic literatures. But this is not necessary. This one book,
Bhagavad-gétä, will suffice because it is the essence of all Vedic literatures and
because it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is said that one
who drinks the water of the Ganges certainly gets salvation, but what to speak
of one who drinks the waters of Bhagavad-gétä? Gétä is the very nectar of the
Mahäbhärata spoken by Viñëu Himself, for Lord Kåñëa is the original Viñëu. It
is nectar emanating from the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and the Ganges is said to be emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. Of
course there is no difference between the mouth and the feet of the Supreme
Lord, but in our position we can appreciate that the Bhagavad-gétä is even more
important than the Ganges.
The Bhagavad-gétä is just like a cow, and Lord Kåñëa, who is a cowherd boy,
is milking this cow. The milk is the essence of the Vedas, and Arjuna is just like
a calf. The wise men, the great sages and pure devotees, are to drink the
nectarean milk of Bhagavad-gétä.
In this present day, man is very eager to have one scripture, one God, one
religion, and one occupation. So let there be one common scripture for the
whole world—Bhagavad-gétä. And let there be one God only for the whole
world—Çré Kåñëa. And one mantra only—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. And let


--- Page 52 ---
52
there be one work only—the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
[ITV 
. intro]
THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION
Evaà paramparä-präptam imaà räjarñayo viduù. (Bhagavad-géta, 4.2) This
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is is received through this disciplic succession:
1) Kåñëa, 2) Brahmä, 3) Närada; 4) Vyäsa, 5) Madhva, 6) Padmanäbha, 7)
Nåhari, 8) Mädhava, 9) Akñobhya, 10) Jayatértha, 11) Jïänasindhu, 12)
Dayänidhi, 13) Vidyänidhi, 14) Räjendra, 15) Jayadharma, 16) Puruñottama, 17)
Brahmaëyatértha, 18) Vyäsatértha, 19) Lakñmépati, 20) Mädhavendra Puré, 21)
Éçvara Puré, (Nityänanda, Advaita), 22) Lord Caitanya, 23) Rüpa (Svarüpa,
Sanätana), 24) Raghunätha, Jéva, 25) Kåñëadäsa, 26) Narottama, 27)
Viçvanätha, 28) (Baladeva) Jagannätha, 29) Bhaktivinode, 30) Gaurakiçora, 31)
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, 32) His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupäda.


--- Page 53 ---
53
