--- Page 1 ---
1
16. The Divine and Demoniac Natures
TEXTS 1-3
é[q>aGavaNauvac )
A>aYa& SatvSa&éuiÖjaRNaYaaeGaVYaviSQaiTa" )
daNa& dMaê Yajê SvaDYaaYaSTaPa AaJaRvMa( )) 1 ))
Aih&Saa SaTYaMa§-aeDaSTYaaGa" XaaiNTarPaEéuNaMa( )
 dYaa >aUTaeZvl/aelu/PTv& MaadRv& h qrcaPal/Ma( )) 2 ))
TaeJa" +aMaa Da*iTa" XaaEcMad]aehae NaaiTaMaaiNaTaa )
>aviNTa SaMPad& dEvqMai>aJaaTaSYa >aarTa )) 3 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
abhayaà sattva-saàçuddhir
jïäna-yoga-vyavasthitiù
dänaà damaç ca yajïaç ca
svädhyäyas tapa ärjavam
ahiàsä satyam akrodhas
tyägaù çäntir apaiçunam
dayä bhüteñv aloluptvaà
märdavaà hrér acäpalam
tejaù kñamä dhåtiù çaucam
adroho näti-mänitä
bhavanti sampadaà daivém


--- Page 2 ---
2
abhijätasya bhärata
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;
abhayam—fearlessness; sattva-saàçuddhiù—purification of one's existence;
jïäna—knowledge; 
yoga—of 
linking 
up; 
vyavasthitiù—the 
situation;
dänam—charity; damaù ca—and controlling the mind; yajïaù ca—and
performance 
of 
sacrifice; 
svädhyäyaù—study 
of 
Vedic 
literature;
tapaù—austerity; 
ärjavam—simplicity; 
ahiàsä—nonviolence;
satyam—truthfulness; akrodhaù—freedom from anger; tyägaù—renunciation;
çäntiù—tranquility; apaiçunam—aversion to faultfinding; dayä—mercy;
bhüteñu—towards all living entities; aloluptvam—freedom from greed;
märdavam—gentleness; 
hréù—modesty; 
acäpalam—determination;
tejaù—vigor ; kñamä—forgiveness; dhåtiù—fortitude; çaucam—cleanliness;
adrohaù—freedom from envy; na—not; atimänitä—expectation of honor;
bhavanti—become; 
sampadam—qualities; 
daivém—transcendental;
abhijätasya—one who is born of; bhärata—O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performance of sacrifice,
study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity; nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom
from anger; renunciation, tranquility, aversion to faultfinding, compassion and
freedom from covetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination;
vigor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from envy and the passion for
honor—these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men
endowed with divine nature.
PURPORT
In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material
world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were compared to the


--- Page 3 ---
3
activities of the living entities, some auspicious, some inauspicious. In the
Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and the asuras, the ungodly, or
demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode
of goodness are considered auspicious for progress on the path of liberation,
and such activities are known as deva prakåti, transcendental by nature. Those
who are situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of
liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on
the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation. Either they will have to
remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the
species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord
explains both the transcendental nature and its attendant qualities, as well as
the demoniac nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and
disadvantages of these qualities.
The word abhijätasya in reference to one born of transcendental qualities or
godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is
known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhädhäna-saàskära. If the parents want a
child in the godly qualities they should follow the ten principles of the human
being. In Bhagavad-gétä we have studied also before that sex life for begetting a
good child is Kåñëa Himself. Sex life is not condemned provided the process is
used in Kåñëa consciousness. Those who are in Kåñëa consciousness at least
should not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them so they may
become Kåñëa conscious after birth. That should be the advantage of children
born of a father or mother absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness.
The social institution known as varëäçrama-dharma—the institution
dividing society into four divisions or castes—is not meant to divide human
society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms of educational
qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state of peace and prosperity.
The qualities mentioned herein are explained as transcendental qualities
meant for making a person progress in spiritual understanding so he can get
liberated from the material world. In the varëäçrama institution the sannyäsé,


--- Page 4 ---
4
or the person in the renounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the
spiritual master of all the social statuses and orders. A brähmaëa is considered
to be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society, namely, the
kñatriyas, the vaiçyas and the çüdras, but a sannyäsé, who is on the top of the
institution, is considered to be the spiritual master of the brähmaëas also. For a
sannyäsé, the first qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyäsé has
to be alone without any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to
depend on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If he thinks,
"After leaving my connections, who will protect me?" he should not accept the
renounced order of life. One must be fully convinced that Kåñëa or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramätmä is always
within, that He is seeing everything and He always knows what one intends to
do. One must thus have firm conviction that Kåñëa as Paramätmä will take
care of a soul surrendered to Him. "I shall never be alone," one should think.
"Even if I live in the darkest regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by
Kåñëa, and He will give me all protection." That conviction is called abhayam,
without fear. This state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced
order of life. Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules and
regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most important of all,
a sannyäsé is strictly forbidden to have any intimate relationship with a woman.
He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in a secluded place. Lord Caitanya
was an ideal sannyäsé, and when He was at Puré His feminine devotees could
not even come near to offer their respects. They were advised to bow down
from a distant place. This is not a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a
stricture imposed on the sannyäsé not to have close connections with women.
One has to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of life in order
to purify his existence. For a sannyäsé, intimate relations with women and
possessions of wealth for sense gratification are strictly forbidden. The ideal
sannyäsé was Lord Caitanya Himself, and we can learn from His life that He
was very strict in regards to women. Although He is considered to be the most
liberal incarnation of Godhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls,


--- Page 5 ---
5
He strictly followed the rules and regulations of the sannyäsa order of the life
in connection with association with woman. One of His personal associates,
namely Choöa Haridäsa, was personally associated with Lord Caitanya, along
with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow or other this
Choöa Haridäsa looked lustily on a young woman, and Lord Caitanya was so
strict that He at once rejected him from the society of His personal associates.
Lord Caitanya said, "For a sannyäsé or anyone who is aspiring to get out of the
clutches of material nature and trying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature
and go back to home, back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material
possessions and women for sense gratification—not even enjoying them, but
just looking toward them with such a propensity—is so condemned that he had
better commit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires." So these are the
processes for purification.
The next item is jïäna-yoga-vyavasthitiù: being engaged in the cultivation
of knowledge. Sannyäsé life is meant for distributing knowledge to the
householders and others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual
advancement. A sannyäsé is supposed to beg from door to door for his
livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of
the qualifications of a transcendentally situated person, and out of sheer
humility the sannyäsé goes from door to door, not exactly for the purpose of
begging, but to see the householders and awaken them to Kåñëa consciousness.
This is the duty of a sannyäsé. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his
spiritual master, he should preach Kåñëa with logic and understanding, and if
he is not so advanced he should not accept the renounced order of life. But
even if he has accepted the renounced order of life without sufficient
knowledge, he should engage himself fully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual
master to cultivate knowledge. A sannyäsé or one in the renounced order of life
must be situated in fearlessness, sattva-saàçuddhiù (purity) and jïäna-yoga
(knowledge).
The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The


--- Page 6 ---
6
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty
percent of their income to propagate Kåñëa consciousness all over the world.
Thus a householder should give in charity to such institutional societies that
are engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There
are different kinds of charities, as will be explained later on, charity in the
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended by the scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and
ignorance is not recommended because it is simply a waste of money. Charity
should be given only to propagate Kåsna consciousness all over the world. That
is charity in the mode of goodness.
Then as far as damaù (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant for
other orders of religious society, but it is especially meant for the householder.
Although he has a wife, a householder should not use his senses for sex life
unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the householders even in sex life,
which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not
require children, he should not enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society
enjoys sex life with contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to
avoid the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality
but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress
in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not beget a child
without the purpose of serving Kåñëa. If he is able to beget children who will be
in Kåñëa consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without
this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure.
Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders because
sacrifices require a large amount of money. Other orders of life, namely the
brahmacarya, the vänaprastha and sannyäsa, have no money; they live by
begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for the
householder. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoined in the
Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive,
and it is not possible for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice


--- Page 7 ---
7
recommended in this age is called saìkértana-yajïa, the chanting of Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma
Räma, Hare Hare. This is the best and most inexpensive sacrifice; everyone
can adopt it and derive benefit. So these three items, namely charity, sense
control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for the householder.
Then svädhyäyaù, Vedic study, and tapas, austerity, and ärjavam, gentleness
or simplicity, are meant for the brahmacarya or student life. Brahmacärés
should have no connection with women; they should live a life of celibacy and
engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of spiritual
knowledge. This is called svädhyäyaù. Tapas or austerity is especially meant for
the retired life. One should not remain a householder throughout his whole
life; he must always remember that there are four divisions of life, brahmacarya,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. So after gåhastha, householder life, one
should retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five
years in student life, twenty-five in householder life, twenty-five in retired life
and twenty-five in the renounced order of life. These are the regulations of the
Vedic religious discipline. A man retired from household life must practice
austerities of the body, mind and tongue. That is tapasyä. The entire
varëäçrama-dharma society is meant for tapasyä. Without tapasyä or austerity
no human being can get liberation. The theory that there is no need of
austerity in life, that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is
neither recommended in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gétä. Such
theories are manufactured by showbottle spiritualists who are trying to gather
more followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not
become attracted. Therefore those who want followers in the name of religion,
just to have a show only, don't restrict the lives of their students nor their own
lives. But that method is not approved by the Vedas.
As far as simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular order of life
follow this principle, but every member, be he in the brahmacarya-äçrama, or
gåhastha-äçrama or vänaprastha-äçrama. One must live very simply.


--- Page 8 ---
8
Ahiàsä means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity. One
should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even after the killing
of the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification. People
are now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply of
grains, fruits and milk. There is no necessity for animal killing. This injunction
is for everyone. When there is no other alternative, one may kill an animal, but
it should be offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food
supply for humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in
spiritual realization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahiàsä means
not checking anyone's progressive life. The animals are also making progress in
their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category of animal life to
another. If a particular animal is killed, then his progress is checked. If an
animal is staying in a particular body for so many days or so many years and is
untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form of life to complete
the remaining days in order to be promoted to another species of life. So their
progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one's palate. This is called
ahiàsä.
Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some
personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the
meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.
That is the process for understanding Vedas. Çruti means that one should hear
from the authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his
personal interest. There are so many commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä that
misinterpret the original text. The real import of the word should be presented,
and that should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.
Akrodhaù means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be
tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger
is the product of the modes of passion and lust, so one who is transcendentally
situated should check himself from anger. Apaiçunam means that one should
not find fault with others or correct them unnecessarily. Of course to call a


--- Page 9 ---
9
thief a thief is not faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very
much offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hréù
means that one should be very modest and must not perform some act which is
abominable. Acäpalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated
or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one
should not be sorry for that; he should make progress with patience and
determination. The word tejaù used here is meant for the kñatriyas. The
kñatriyas should always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak.
They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required, they
must exhibit it.
Çaucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one's dealings
also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who should not deal in the
black market. Nätimänitä, not expecting honor, applies to the çüdras, the
worker class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the
lowest of the four classes. They should not be puffed up with unnecessary
prestige or honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the
çüdras to offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order.
All these sixteen(1) qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities.
They should be cultivated according to the different statuses of the social
order. The purport is that even though material conditions are miserable, if
these qualities are developed by practice, by all classes of men, then gradually it
is possible to rise to the highest platform of transcendental realization.
TEXT 4
dM>aae dPaaeR_i>aMaaNaê §-aeDa" PaaåZYaMaev c )
AjaNa& cai>aJaaTaSYa PaaQaR SaMPadMaaSaurqMa( )) 4 ))
dambho darpo 'bhimänaç ca


--- Page 10 ---
10
krodhaù päruñyam eva ca
ajïänaà cäbhijätasya
pärtha sampadam äsurém
dambhaù—pride; 
darpaù—arrogance; 
abhimänaù—conceit; 
ca—and;
krodaù—anger; 
päruñyam—harshness; 
eva—certainly; 
ca—and;
ajïänam—ignorance; ca—and; abhijätasya—one who is born; pärtha—O son
of Påthä; sampadam—nature; äsurém—demoniac.
TRANSLATION
Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance—these qualities
belong to those of demonic nature, O son of Påthä.
PURPORT
In this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want to make
a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science, although they do not
follow the principles. They are always arrogant or proud in possessing some
type of education or so much wealth. They desire to be worshiped by others,
and demand respectability, although they do not command respect. Over trifles
they become very angry and speak harshly, not gently. They do not know what
should be done and what should not be done. They do everything whimsically,
according to their own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. These
demoniac qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of their bodies in
the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow they manifest all these
inauspicious qualities.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 5


--- Page 11 ---
11
dEvq SaMPaiÜMaae+aaYa iNabNDaaYaaSaurq MaTaa )
Maa éuc" SaMPad& dEvqMai>aJaaTaae_iSa Paa<@v )) 5 ))
daivé sampad vimokñäya
nibandhäyäsuré matä
mä çucaù sampadaà daivém
abhijäto 'si päëòava
daivé—transcendental; sampat—nature; vimokñäya—meant for liberation;
nibandhäya—for bondage; äsuré—demoniac qualities; matä—it is considered;
mä—do not; çucaù—worry; sampadam—nature; daivém—transcendental;
abhijätaù—born; asi—you are; päëòava—O son of Päëòu.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demonic qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Päëòu, for you are
born with the divine qualities.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac because he
was considering the pro's and con's. He was considering whether respectable
persons such as Bhéñma and Droëa should be killed or not, so he was not acting
under the influence of anger, false prestige, or harshness. Therefore he was not
of the quality of the demons. For a kñatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at
the enemy is considered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is
demoniac. Therefore, there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who
performs the regulated principles of the different orders of life is
transcendentally situated.


--- Page 12 ---
12
TEXT 6
ÜaE >aUTaSaGaaŒ l/aeke-_iSMaNdEv AaSaur Wv c )
dEvae ivSTarXa" Pa[ae¢- AaSaur& PaaQaR Mae é*<au )) 6 ))
dvau bhüta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva äsura eva ca
daivo vistaraçaù prokta
äsuraà pärtha me çåëu
dvau—two; bhüta-sargau—created living beings; loke—in this world;
asmin—this; daivaù—godly; äsuraù—demoniac; eva—certainly; ca—and;
daivaù—divine; 
vistaraçaù—at 
great 
length; 
proktaù—said;
asuram—demoniac; pärtha—O son of Påthä; me—from Me; çåëu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
O son of Påthä, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is
called the divine and the other demonic. I have already explained to you at
length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living entities
are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are born with divine
qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say they abide by the injunctions in
scriptures and by the authorities. One should perform duties in the light of
authoritative scripture. This mentality is called divine. One who does not
follow the regulative principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who
acts according to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no other


--- Page 13 ---
13
criterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. It is
mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons are born
of the Prajäpati; the only difference is that one class obeys the Vedic
injunctions and the other does not.
TEXT 7
Pa[v*ita& c iNav*ita& c JaNaa Na ivduraSaura" )
Na XaaEc& NaaiPa cacarae Na SaTYa& Taezu ivÛTae )) 7 ))
pravåttià ca nivåttià ca
janä na vidur äsuräù
na çaucaà näpi cäcäro
na satyaà teñu vidyate
pravåttim—proper action; ca—also; nivåttim—improper action; ca—and;
janäù—persons; na—never; viduù—know; äsuräù—in demoniac quality;
na—never; 
çaucam—cleanliness; 
na—nor; 
api—also; 
ca—and;
äcäraù—behavior; na—never; satyam—truth; teñu—in them; vidyate—there
is.
TRANSLATION
Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to
be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.
PURPORT
In every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules and
regulations which are followed from the beginning, especially among the
Äryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as the most
advanced civilized peoples. Those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions


--- Page 14 ---
14
are supposed to be demons. Therefore it is stated here that the demons do not
know the scriptural rules, nor do they have any inclination to follow them.
Most of them do not know them, and even if some of them know, they have
not the tendency to follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to
act in terms of the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either
externally or internally.
One should always be careful to keep his body clean by bathing, brushing
teeth, changing clothes, etc. As far as internal cleanliness is concerned, one
should always remember the holy names of God and chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare. The demons neither like nor follow all these rules for external and
internal cleanliness.
As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding human
behavior, such as the Manu-saàhitä, which is the law of the human race. Even
up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-saàhitä. Laws of
inheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, in the
Manu-saàhitä, it is clearly stated that a woman should not be given freedom.
That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, but they are like
children. Children are not given freedom, but that does not mean that they are
kept as slaves. The demons have now neglected such injunctions, and they
think that women should be given as much freedom as men. However, this has
not improved the social condition of the world. Actually, a woman should be
given protection at every stage of life. She should be given protection by the
father in her younger days, by the husband in her youth, and by the grownup
sons in her old age. This is proper social behavior according to the
Manu-saàhitä. But modern education has artificially devised a puffed up
concept of womanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an
imagination in human society. Nor is the moral condition of woman very good
now. The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sages and the


--- Page 15 ---
15
rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the social condition of the
demoniac people is very miserable.
TEXT 8
ASaTYaMaPa[iTaï& Tae JaGadahurNaqìrMa( )
AParSParSaM>aUTa& ik-MaNYaTk-aMahETauk-Ma( )) 8 ))
asatyam apratiñöhaà te
jagad ähur anéçvaram
aparaspara-sambhütaà
kim anyat käma-haitukam
asatyam—unreal; apratiñöham—without foundation; te—they; jagat—the
cosmic manifestation; ähuù—is said; anéçvaram—with no controller;
aparaspara—by mutual lust; sambhütam—caused; kim anyat—there is no other
cause; käma-haitukam—it is due to lust only.
TRANSLATION
They say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and that there
is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and has no cause other than
lust.
PURPORT
The demoniac conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no
cause, no effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They say that
this cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material actions and reactions.
They do not think that the world was created by God for a certain purpose.
They have their own theory: that the world has come about in its own way and
that there is no reason to believe that there is a God behind it. For them there


--- Page 16 ---
16
is no difference between spirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme
Spirit. Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be a
mass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatever
manifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They take it for
granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display of ignorance. Just as in a
dream we may create so many things, which actually have no existence, so
when we are awake we shall see that everything is simply a dream. But
factually, although the demons say that life is a dream, they are very expert in
enjoying this dream. And so, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become
more and more implicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is
simply the result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world is
born without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter that has
produced the living entities, and there is no question of the existence of the
soul. As many living creatures come out from perspiration and from a dead
body without any cause, similarly, the whole living world has come out of the
material combinations of the cosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature
is the cause of this manifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not
believe in the words of Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä: mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sa-caräcaram. "Under My direction the whole material world is moving." In
other words, amongst the demons there is no perfect knowledge of the creation
of this world; every one of them has some particular theory of his own.
According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as good as another,
for they do not believe in a standard understanding of the scriptural
injunctions.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 9
WTaa& d*iíMaví>Ya NaíaTMaaNaae_LPabuÖYa" )


--- Page 17 ---
17
Pa[>avNTYauGa]k-MaaR<a" +aYaaYa JaGaTaae_ihTaa" )) 9 ))
etäà dåñöim avañöabhya
nañöätmäno 'lpa-buddhayaù
prabhavanty ugra-karmäëaù
kñayäya jagato 'hitäù
etäm—thus; 
dåñöim—vision; 
avañöabhya—accepting; 
nañöa—lost;
ätmänaù—self; 
alpa-buddhayaù—less 
intelligent; 
prabhavanti—flourish;
ugra-karmäëaù—in painful activities; kñayäya—for destruction; jagataù—of
the world; ahitäù—unbeneficial.
TRANSLATION
Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and
who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to
destroy the world.
PURPORT
The demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to
destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. The
materialists, who have no concept of God, think that they are advancing. But,
according to Bhagavad-gétä, they are unintelligent and devoid of all sense.
They try to enjoy this material world to the utmost limit and therefore always
engage in inventing something for sense gratification. Such materialistic
inventions are considered to be advancement of human civilization, but the
result is that people grow more and more violent and more and more cruel,
cruel to animals and cruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to
behave toward one another. Animal killing is very prominent amongst
demoniac people. Such people are considered the enemies of the world because
ultimately they will invent or create something which will bring destruction to


--- Page 18 ---
18
all. Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, of
which the whole world is today very proud. At any moment war may take place,
and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things are created solely for
the destruction of the world, and this is indicated here. Due to godlessness,
such weapons are invented in human society; they are not meant for the peace
and prosperity of the world.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 10
k-aMaMaaié[TYa duZPaUr& dM>aMaaNaMadaiNvTaa" )
Maaehad(Ga*hqTvaSad(Ga]ahaNPa[vTaRNTae_éuicv]Taa" )) 10 ))
kämam äçritya duñpüraà
dambha-mäna-madänvitäù
mohäd gåhétväsad-grähän
pravartante 'çuci-vratäù
kämam—lust; 
äçritya—taking 
shelter 
of; 
duñpüram—insatiable;
dambha—pride; mäna—false prestige; mada-anvitäù—absorbed in conceit;
mohät—by illusion; gåhétvä—taking; asat—nonpermanent; grähän—things;
pravartante—flourish; açuci—unclean; vratäù—avowed.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac, taking shelter of insatiable lust, pride and false prestige, and
being thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the
impermanent.
PURPORT


--- Page 19 ---
19
The demoniac mentality is described here. The demons' lust is never
satiated. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable desires for
material enjoyment. Although they are always full of anxieties on account of
accepting nonpermanent things, they still continue to engage in such activities
out of illusion. They have no knowledge and cannot tell that they are heading
the wrong way. Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create
their own God, create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is
that they become more and more attracted to two things—sex enjoyment and
accumulation of material wealth. The word açuci-vratäù, unclean vow, is very
significant in this connection. Such demoniac people are only attracted by
wine, women, gambling and meat eating; those are their açuci, unclean habits.
Induced by pride and false prestige, they create some principles of religion
which are not approved by the Vedic injunctions. Although such demoniac
people are most abominable in the world, still, by artificial means, the world
creates a false honor for them. Although they are gliding toward hell, they
consider themselves very much advanced.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXTS 11-12
icNTaaMaPairMaeYaa& c Pa[l/YaaNTaaMauPaaié[Taa" )
k-aMaaePa>aaeGaParMaa WTaavidiTa iNaiêTaa" )) 11 ))
AaXaaPaaXaXaTaEbRÖa" k-aMa§-aeDaParaYa<aa" )
wRhNTae k-aMa>aaeGaaQaRMaNYaaYaeNaaQaRSaÄYaaNa( )) 12 ))
cintäm aparimeyäà ca
pralayäntäm upäçritäù
kämopabhoga-paramä
etävad iti niçcitäù


--- Page 20 ---
20
äçä-päça-çatair baddhäù
käma-krodha-paräyaëäù
éhante käma-bhogärtham
anyäyenärtha-saïcayän
cintäm—fears 
and 
anxieties; 
aparimeyäm—unmeasurable; 
ca—and;
pralaya-antäm—unto the point of death; upäçritäù—having taken shelter of
them; käma-upabhoga—sense gratification; paramäù—the highest goal of life;
etävat—thus; iti—in this way; niçcitäù—ascertain; äçä-päça—entanglement in
the network of hope; çataiù—by hundreds; baddhäù—being bound;
käma—lust; krodha—anger; paräyaëäù—always situated in that mentality;
éhante—desire; käma—lust; bhoga—sense enjoyment; artham—for that
purpose; anyäyena—illegally; artha—wealth; saïcayän—accumulate.
TRANSLATION
They believe that to gratify the senses unto the end of life is the prime
necessity of human civilization. Thus there is no end to their anxiety. Being
bound by hundreds and thousands of desires, by lust and anger, they secure
money by illegal means for sense gratification.
PURPORT
The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate goal
of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not believe in life
after death, and they do not believe that one takes on different types of bodies
according to one's karma, or activities in this world. Their plans for life are
never finished, and they go on preparing plan after plan, all of which are never
finished. We have personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality,
who, even at the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his
life for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such foolish
people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a moment.


--- Page 21 ---
21
When the notice is there, there is no consideration of the man's desire. The
laws of nature do not allow a second beyond what one is destined to enjoy.
The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul within
himself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense gratification. He
does not know that there is a witness sitting within his heart. The Supersoul is
observing the activities of the individual soul. As it is stated in the Vedic
literature, the Upaniñads, there are two birds sitting in one tree; the one is
acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of the branches, and the other is
witnessing. But one who is demoniac has no knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor
has he any faith; therefore he feels free to do anything for sense enjoyment,
regardless of the consequences.
Collier, [BTG April, October 1956]
TEXTS 13-15
wdMaÛ MaYaa l/BDaiMaMa& Pa[aPSYae MaNaaerQaMa( )
wdMaSTaqdMaiPa Mae >aivZYaiTa PauNaDaRNaMa( )) 13 ))
ASaaE MaYaa hTa" Xa}auhRiNaZYae caParaNaiPa )
wRìrae_hMah& >aaeGaq iSaÖae_h& bl/vaNSau%q )) 14 ))
Aa!yae_i>aJaNavaNaiSMa k-ae_NYaae_iSTa Sad*Xaae MaYaa )
Ya+Yae daSYaaiMa MaaeidZYa wTYajaNaivMaaeihTaa" )) 15 ))
idam adya mayä labdham
imaà präpsye manoratham
idam astédam api me
bhaviñyati punar dhanam
asau mayä hataù çatrur
haniñye cäparän api


--- Page 22 ---
22
éçvaro 'ham ahaà bhogé
siddho 'haà balavän sukhé
äòhyo 'bhijanavän asmi
ko 'nyo 'sti sadåço mayä
yakñye däsyämi modiñya
ity ajïäna-vimohitäù
idam—this; adya—today; mayä—by me; labdham—gained; imam—this;
präpsye—I shall gain; manoratham—according to my desires; idam—this;
asti—there is; idam—this; api—also; me—mine; bhaviñyati—will increase in
the future; punaù—again; dhanam—wealth; asau—that; mayä—by me;
hataù—has been killed; çatruù—enemy; haniñye—I shall kill; ca—also;
aparän—others; api—certainly; éçvaraù—the lord; aham—I am; aham—I am;
bhogé—the enjoyer; siddhah—perfect; aham—I am; balavän—powerful;
sukhé—happy; äòhyaù—wealthy; abhijanavän—surrounded by aristocratic
relatives; asmi—I am; kaù—who else; anyaù—other; asti—there is;
sadåçaù—like; mayä—me; yakñye—I shall sacrifice; däsyämi—I shall give in
charity; 
modiñye—I 
shall 
rejoice; 
iti—thus; 
ajïäna—ignorance;
vimohitäù—deluded by.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in
the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him; and my
other enemy will also be killed. I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I
am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by
aristocratic relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall
perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this
way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.
Collier, [BTG 1956]


--- Page 23 ---
23
TEXT 16
ANaek-ictaiv>a]aNTaa MaaehJaal/SaMaav*Taa" )
Pa[Sa¢-a" k-aMa>aaeGaezu PaTaiNTa Narke-_éucaE )) 16 ))
aneka-citta-vibhräntä
moha-jäla-samävåtäù
prasaktäù käma-bhogeñu
patanti narake 'çucau
aneka—numerous; 
citta-vibhräntäù—perplexed 
by 
anxieties; 
moha—of
illusions; jäla—by a network; samävåtäù—surrounded; prasaktäù—attached;
käma—lust; bhogeñu—sense gratification; patanti—glides down; narake—into
hell; açucau—unclean.
TRANSLATION
Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, one
becomes too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and falls down into hell.
PURPORT
The demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He only thinks how much assessment he has just now and schemes
to engage that stock of wealth farther and farther. For that reason, he does not
hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals in the black market for illegal
gratification. He is enamoured by the possessions he has already, such as land,
family, house and bank balance, and he is always planning to improve them. He
believes in his own strength, and he does not know that whatever he is gaining
is due to his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to accumulate such
things, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply thinks that all his


--- Page 24 ---
24
mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac person believes in the
strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma. According to the law of
karma, a man takes his birth in a high family, or becomes rich, or very well
educated, or very beautiful because of good work in the past. The demoniac
thinks that all these things are accidental and due to the strength of his
personal ability. He does not sense any arrangement behind all the varieties of
people, beauty, and education. Anyone who comes into competition with such
a demoniac man is his enemy. There are many demoniac people, and each is
enemy to the others. This enmity becomes more and more deep—between
persons, then between families, then between societies, and at last between
nations. Therefore there is constant strife, war and enmity all over the world.
Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all others.
Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the Supreme God, and a
demoniac preacher tells his followers: "Why are you seeking God elsewhere?
You are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you can do. Don't believe in
God. Throw away God. God is dead." These are the demoniac's preachings.
Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and influential, or
even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than him and that no one is more
influential than him. As far as promotion to the higher planetary system is
concerned, he does not believe in performing yajïas or sacrifices. Demons
think that they will manufacture their own process of yajïa and prepare some
machine, by which they will be able to reach any higher planet. The best
example of such a demoniac man was Rävaëa. He offered a program to the
people by which he would prepare a staircase so that anyone could reach the
heavenly planets without performing sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the
Vedas. Similarly, in the present age such demoniac men are striving to reach
the higher planetary systems by mechanical arrangement. These are examples
of bewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they are gliding
toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word mohajäla is very significant. Jäla means
net; like fishes caught in a net, they have no way to come out.


--- Page 25 ---
25
TEXT 17
AaTMaSaM>aaivTaa" STaBDaa DaNaMaaNaMadaiNvTaa" )
YaJaNTae NaaMaYajESTae dM>aeNaaiviDaPaUvRk-Ma( )) 17 ))
ätma-sambhävitäù stabdhä
dhana-mäna-madänvitäù
yajante näma-yajïais te
dambhenävidhi-pürvakam
ätma-sambhävitäù—self-complacent; 
stabdhäù—impudent;
dhana-mäna—wealth and false prestige; mada-anvitäù—absorbed in pride;
yajante—perform sacrifices; näma—in name only; yajïaiù—with such a
sacrifice; te—they; dambhena—out of pride; avidhi-pürvakam—without
following any rules and regulations.
TRANSLATION
Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige,
they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only without following any rules or
regulations.
PURPORT
Thinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or scripture, the
demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious or sacrificial rites. And since
they do not believe in authority, they are very impudent. This is due to illusion
caused by accumulating some wealth and false prestige. Sometimes such
demons take up the role of preacher, mislead the people, and become known as
religious reformers or as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing
sacrifices, or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God.


--- Page 26 ---
26
Common men advertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish
they are considered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principles
of spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order of life and
engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so many restrictions for
one who has renounced this world. The demons, however, do not care for such
restrictions. They think that whatever path one can create is one's own path;
there is no such thing as a standard path one has to follow. The word
avidhi-pürvakam, meaning disregard for the rules and regulations, is especially
stressed here. These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.


--- Page 27 ---
27


--- Page 28 ---
28
TEXT 18
Ahªar& bl&/ dPa| k-aMa& §-aeDa& c Sa&ié[Taa" )
MaaMaaTMaPardehezu Pa[iÜzNTaae_>YaSaUYak-a" )) 18 ))
ahaìkäraà balaà darpaà
kämaà krodhaà ca saàçritäù
mäm ätma-para-deheñu
pradviñanto 'bhyasüyakäù
ahaìkäram—false ego; balam—strength; darpam—pride; kämam—lust;
krodham—anger; ca—also; saàçritäù—having taken shelter of; mäm—Me;
ätma—one's own; para-deheñu—in other bodies; pradviñantaù—blasphemes;
abhyasüyakäù—envious.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon becomes
envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in his own body
and in the bodies of others, and blasphemes against the real religion.
PURPORT
A demoniac person, being always against God's supremacy, does not like to
believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and of the
existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused by his
so-called prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength. He does not
know that the present life is a preparation for the next life. Not knowing this,
he is actually envious of his own self, as well as of others. He commits violence
on other bodies and on his own. He does not care for the supreme control of
the Personality of Godhead because he has no knowledge. Being envious of the
scriptures and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false


--- Page 29 ---
29
arguments against the existence of God and refutes the scriptural authority. He
thinks himself independant and powerful in every action. He thinks that since
no one can equal him in strength, power, or in wealth, he can act in any way
and no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the
advancement of his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down by his
own power.
TEXT 19
TaaNah& iÜzTa" §U-raNSa&Saarezu NaraDaMaaNa( )
i+aPaaMYaJaóMaéu>aaNaaSaurqZvev YaaeiNazu )) 19 ))
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
tän—those; 
aham—I; 
dviñataù—envious; 
krürän—mischievous;
saàsäreñu—into the ocean of material existence; narädhamän—the lowest of
mankind; 
kñipämi—put; 
ajasram—innumerable; 
açubhän—inauspicious;
äsuréñu—demoniac; eva—certainly; yoniñu—in the wombs.
TRANSLATION
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of
life.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular individual
soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme will. The demoniac


--- Page 30 ---
30
person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the Lord, and it is a fact that
he may act according to his own whims, but his next birth will depend upon
the decision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not on himself. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Third Canto, it is stated that an individual soul, after his
death, is put into the womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body
under the supervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence
we find so many species of life—animals, insects, men, and so on. All are
arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the demoniac,
it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into the wombs of demons,
and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest of mankind. Such demoniac
species of life are held to be always full of lust, always violent and hateful and
always unclean. They are just like so many beasts in a jungle.
Collier, [Madhya 25.40]
TEXT 20
AaSaurq& YaaeiNaMaaPaàa MaU!a JaNMaiNaJaNMaiNa )
MaaMaPa[aPYaEv k-aENTaeYa TaTaae YaaNTYaDaMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 20 ))
äsuréà yonim äpannä
müòhä janmani janmani
mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim
äsurém—demoniac; yonim—species; äpannäù—gaining; müòhäù—the foolish;
janmani janmani—in birth after birth; mäm—unto Me; apräpya—without
achieving; eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; tataù—thereafter;
yänti—goes; adhamäm—condemned; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 31 ---
31
Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such persons
can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type
of existence.
PURPORT
It is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is never
merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniac people, life
after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and, not achieving the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, so that at last they
achieve bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. It is clearly stated that such
demons have practically no chance of receiving the mercy of God at any stage
of later life. In the Vedas also it is stated that such persons gradually sink to
become dogs and hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God
should not be advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons. In
answer to this question, in the Vedänta-sütra we find that the Supreme Lord
has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons, in the lowest
status of life is simply another feature of His mercy. Sometimes the asuras are
killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killing is also good for them, for in Vedic
literature we find that anyone who is killed by the Supreme Lord becomes
liberated. There are instances in history of many asuras—Rävaëa, Kaàsa,
Hiraëyakaçipu—to whom the Lord appeared in various incarnations just to
kill. Therefore God's mercy is shown to the asuras if they are fortunate enough
to be killed by Him.


--- Page 32 ---
32


--- Page 33 ---
33
TEXT 21
i}aivDa& Nark-SYaed& Üar& NaaXaNaMaaTMaNa" )
k-aMa" §-aeDaSTaQaa l/ae>aSTaSMaadeTaT}aYa& TYaJaeTa( )) 21 ))
tri-vidhaà narakasyedaà
dväraà näçanam ätmanaù
kämaù krodhas tathä lobhas
tasmäd etat trayaà tyajet
tri-vidham—three kinds of; narakasya—hellish; idam—this; dväram—gate;
näçanam—destructive; ätmanaù—of the self; kämaù—lust; krodhaù—anger;
tathä—as 
well 
as; 
lobhaù—greed; 
tasmät—therefore; 
etat—these;
trayam—three; tyajet—must give up.
TRANSLATION
There are three gates leading to this hell—lust, anger, and greed. Every sane
man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.
PURPORT
The beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to satisfy his
lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane man who does not
want to glide down to the species of demoniac life must try to give up these
three enemies which can kill the self to such an extent that there will be no
possibility of liberation from this material entanglement.
TEXT 22
WTaEivRMau¢-" k-aENTaeYa TaMaaeÜarEiñi>aNaRr" )


--- Page 34 ---
34
AacrTYaaTMaNa" é[eYaSTaTaae YaaiTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 22 ))
etair vimuktaù kaunteya
tamo-dvärais tribhir naraù
äcaraty ätmanaù çreyas
tato yäti paräà gatim
etaiù—by these; vimuktaù—being liberated; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
tamaù-dväraiù—the gates of ignorance; tribhiù—three kinds of; naraù—a
person; 
äcarati—performs 
; 
ätmanaù—self; 
çreyaù—benediction;
tataù—thereafter; yäti—goes; paräm—supreme; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kunté, performs
acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme
destination.
PURPORT
One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust, anger,
and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed, the more his
existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and regulations enjoined
in the Vedic literature. By following the regulative principles of human life,
one gradually raises himself to the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so
fortunate, by such practice, to rise to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness, then
success is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action and
reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of purification. The
whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and anger. By cultivating
knowledge of this process, one can be elevated to the highest position of
self-realization; this self-realization is perfected in devotional service. In that
devotional service, the liberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed.


--- Page 35 ---
35
Therefore, according to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders
of life and the four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritual
order system. There are different rules and regulations for different castes or
divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them, he will be
automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual realization. Then he
can have liberation without a doubt.
TEXT 23
Ya" XaañiviDaMauTSa*JYa vTaRTae k-aMak-arTa" )
Na Sa iSaiÖMavaPanaeiTa Na Sau%& Na Para& GaiTaMa( )) 23 ))
yaù çästra-vidhim utsåjya
vartate käma-kärataù
na sa siddhim aväpnoti
na sukhaà na paräà gatim
yaù—anyone; çästra-vidhim—the regulations of the scriptures; utsåjya—giving
up; vartate—remains; käma-kärataù—acting whimsically in lust; na—never;
saù—he; 
siddhim—perfection; 
aväpnoti—achieves; 
na—never;
sukham—happiness; na—never; paräm—the supreme; gatim—perfectional
stage.
TRANSLATION
But he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own
whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.
PURPORT
As described before, the çästra-vidhim, or the direction of the çästra, is given
to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyone is expected to


--- Page 36 ---
36
follow these rules and regulations. If one does not follow them and acts
whimsically according to his lust, greed and desire, then he never will be
perfect in his life. In other words, a man may theoretically know all these
things, but if he does not apply them in his own life, then he is to be known as
the lowest of mankind. In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to
be sane and to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But even if
he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and ultimately does
not come to the stage of understanding the Supreme Lord, then all his
knowledge becomes spoiled. Therefore one should gradually raise himself to the
platform of Kåñëa consciousness and devotional service; it is then and there
that he can attain the highest perfectional stage, not otherwise.
The word käma-cärataù is very significant. A person who knowingly
violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, still he acts. This
is called acting whimsically. He knows that this should be done, but still he
does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical. Such persons are destined to be
condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such persons cannot have the perfection
which is meant for the human life. The human life is especially meant for
purifying one's existence, and one who does not follow the rules and
regulations cannot purify himself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.
TEXT 24
TaSMaaC^añ& Pa[Maa<a& Tae k-aYaaRk-aYaRVYaviSQaTaaE )
jaTva XaañivDaaNaae¢&- k-MaR k-TauRiMahahRiSa )) 24 ))
tasmäc chästraà pramäëaà te
käryäkärya-vyavasthitau
jïätvä çästra-vidhänoktaà
karma kartum ihärhasi


--- Page 37 ---
37
tasmät—therefore; 
çästram—scriptures; 
pramäëam—evidence; 
te—your;
kärya—duty; akärya—forbidden activities; vyavasthitau—in determining;
jïätvä—knowing; çästra—of scripture; vidhäna—regulations; uktam—as
declared; karma—work; kartum—to do; iha arhasi—you should do it.
TRANSLATION
One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations
of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he
may gradually be elevated.
PURPORT
As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of the
Vedas are meant for knowing Kåñëa. If one understands Krsëa from the
Bhagavad-gétä and becomes situated in Krsëa consciousness, engaging himself
in devotional service, he has reached the highest perfection of knowledge
offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu made this process
very easy: He asked people simply to chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare and to
engage in the devotional service of the Lord and eat the remnants of foodstuff
offered to the Deity. One who is directly engaged in all these devotional
activities is to be understood as having studied all Vedic literature. He has
come to the conclusion perfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are
not in Krsëa consciousness or who are not engaged in devotional service, what
is to be done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctions of
the Vedas. One should act accordingly, without argument. That is called
following the principles of çästra, or scripture. Çästra is without the four
principal defects that are visible in the conditioned soul: imperfect senses, the
propensity for cheating, certainty of committing mistakes, and certainty of
being illusioned. These four principal defects in conditioned life disqualify one


--- Page 38 ---
38
from putting forth rules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations
as described in the çästra—being above these defects—are accepted without
alteration by all great saints, äcäryas, and great souls.
In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generally
classified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them, however,
lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas. Without following the
principles of the scriptures, one cannot elevate himself to the perfectional
stage. One who actually, therefore, understands the purport of the çästras is
considered fortunate.
In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That is the greatest
offense of human life. Therefore, mäyä, the material energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is always giving us trouble in the shape of the
threefold miseries. This material energy is constituted of the three modes of
material nature. One has to raise himself at least to the mode of goodness
before the path to understanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without
raising oneself to the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in
ignorance and passion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the
modes of passion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, and
deride the proper understanding of the spiritual master, and they do not care
for the regulations of the scriptures. In spite of hearing the glories of
devotional service, they are not attracted. Thus they manufacture their own
way of elevation. These are some of the defects of human society, which lead to
the demoniac status of life. If, however, one is able to be guided by a proper and
bona fide spiritual master, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the
higher stage, then one's life becomes successful.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.


--- Page 39 ---
39
Endnotes
1 (Popup - Popup)
twenty-six
