--- Page 1 ---
1
18. Conclusion-The Perfection of Renunciation
TEXT 1
AJauRNa ovac )
SaNNYaaSaSYa Mahabahae TatviMaC^aiMa veidTauMa( )
TYaaGaSYa c ôzqke-Xa Pa*Qa¡e-iXaiNazUdNa )) 1 ))
arjuna uväca
sannyäsasya mahäbäho
tattvam icchämi veditum
tyägasya ca håñékeça
påthak keçéniñüdana
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; sannyäsasya—renunciation; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; tattvam—truth; icchämi—I wish; veditum—to understand;
tyägasya—of renunciation; ca—also; håñékeça—O master of the senses;
påthak—differently; keçi-nisüdana—O killer of the Keçé demon.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyäga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyäsa], O killer of
the Keçé demon, Håñékeça.
PURPORT


--- Page 2 ---
2
Actually the Bhagavad-gétä is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics discussed
before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Kåñëa stresses that devotional
service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life.
This same point is summarized in the Eighteenth Chapter as the most
confidential path of knowledge. In the first six chapters, stress was given to
devotional service: yoginäm api sarveñäm... "Of all yogés or transcendentalists,
one who always thinks of Me within himself is best." In the next six chapters,
pure devotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In the third
six chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of material nature and
transcendental nature, and devotional service were described. It was concluded
that all acts should be performed in conjunction with the Supreme Lord,
summarized by the words om tat sat, which indicate Viñëu, the Supreme
Person. In the third part of Bhagavad-gétä, devotional service was established
by the example of past äcäryas and the Brahma-sütra, the Vedänta-sütra, which
cites that devotional service is the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else.
Certain impersonalists consider themselves monopolizers of the knowledge of
Vedänta-sütra, but actually the Vedänta-sütra is meant for understanding
devotional service, for the Lord Himself is the composer of the Vedänta-sütra,
and He is its knower. That is described in the Fifteenth Chapter. In every
scripture, every Veda, devotional service is the objective. That is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä.
As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter was
described, similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of all
instruction is given. The purpose of life is indicated to be renunciation and
attainment of the transcendental position above the three material modes of
nature. Arjuna wants to clarify the two distinct subject matters of
Bhagavad-gétä, namely renunciation (tyäga) and the renounced order of life
(sannyäsa). Thus he is asking the meaning of these two words.
Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord—Håñékeça and


--- Page 3 ---
3
Keçinisüdana—are significant. Håñékeça is Kåñëa, the master of all senses, who
can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests Him to summarize
everything in such a way that he can remain equiposed. Yet he has some
doubts, and doubts are always compared to demons. He therefore addresses
Kåñëa as Keçinisüdana. Keçé was a most formidable demon who was killed by
the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting Kåñëa to kill the demon of doubt.
TEXT 2
é[q>aGavaNauvac )
k-aMYaaNaa& k-MaR<aa& NYaaSa& SaNNYaaSa& k-vYaae ivdu" )
SavRk-MaRf-l/TYaaGa& Pa[ahuSTYaaGa& ivc+a<aa" )) 2 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
kämyänäà karmaëäà nyäsaà
sannyäsaà kavayo viduù
sarva-karma-phala-tyägaà
prähus tyägaà vicakñaëäù
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;
kämyänäm—with 
desire; 
karmaëäm—activities; 
nyäsam—renunciation;
sannyäsam—renounced order of life; kavayaù—the learned; viduù—know;
sarva—all; karma—activities; phala—of results; tyägam—renunciation;
prähuù—call; tyägam—renunciation; vicakñaëäù—the experienced.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said, To give up the results of all activities is called
renunciation [tyäga] by the wise. And that state is called the renounced order of
life [sannyäsa] by great learned men.


--- Page 4 ---
4
PURPORT
The performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is the
instruction of Bhagavad-gétä. But activities leading to advanced spiritual
knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in the next verse.
There are many prescriptions of methods for performing sacrifice for some
particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. There are certain sacrifices to
perform to attain a good son or to attain elevation to the higher planets, but
sacrifices prompted by desires should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the
purification of one's heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should
not be given up.
TEXT 3
TYaaJYa& daezvidTYaeke- k-MaR Pa[ahuMaRNaqiz<a" )
YajdaNaTaPa"k-MaR Na TYaaJYaiMaiTa caPare )) 3 ))
tyäjyaà doñavad ity eke
karma prähur manéñiëaù
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyam iti cäpare
tyäjyam—must be given up; doñavat—as an evil; iti—thus; eke—one group;
karma—work; prähuù—said; manéñiëaù—of great thinkers; yajïa—sacrifice;
däna—charity; tapaù—penance; karma—work; na—never; tyäjyam—is to be
given up; iti—thus; ca—certainly; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given
up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and


--- Page 5 ---
5
penance should never be abandoned.
PURPORT
There are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects of
contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in a sacrifice,
yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable. Although animal
killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal is not
considered to be killed. The sacrifice is to give a new life to the animal.
Sometimes the animal is given a new animal life after being killed in the
sacrifice, and sometimes the animal is promoted immediately to the human
form of life. But there are different opinions among the sages. Some say that
animal killing should always be avoided, and others say that for a specific
sacrifice it is good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now
being clarified by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 4
iNaêYa& é*<au Mae Ta}a TYaaGae >arTaSataMa )
TYaaGaae ih PauåzVYaaga] i}aivDa" SaMPa[k-IiTaRTa" )) 4 ))
niçcayaà çåëu me tatra
tyäge bharata-sattama
tyägo hi puruña-vyäghra
tri-vidhaù samprakértitaù
niçcayam—certainly; çåëu—hear; me—from Me; tatra—there; tyäge—in the
matter 
of 
renunciation; 
bharata-sattama—O 
best 
of 
the 
Bhäratas;
tyägaù—renunciation; hi—certainly; puruña-vyäghra—O tiger among human
beings; tri-vidhaù—three kinds; samprakértitaù—is declared.


--- Page 6 ---
6
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhäratas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger among
men, there are three kinds of renunciation declared in the scriptures.
PURPORT
Although there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, gives His judgment, which should
be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given by the Lord. Here
the Lord is personally present, and His word should be taken as final. The Lord
says that the process of renunciation should be considered in terms of the
modes of material nature in which they are performed.
TEXT 5
YajdaNaTaPa"k-MaR Na TYaaJYa& k-aYaRMaev TaTa( )
Yajae daNa& TaPaêEv PaavNaaiNa MaNaqiz<aaMa( )) 5 ))
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat
yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva
pävanäni manéñiëäm
yajïa—sacrifice; 
däna—charity; 
tapaù—penance; 
karma—activities;
na—never; tyäjyam—to be given up; käryam—must be done; eva—certainly;
tat—that; yajïaù—sacrifice; dänam—charity; tapaù—penance; ca—also;
eva—certainly; pävanäni—purifying; manéñiëäm—even of the great souls.
TRANSLATION
Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be


--- Page 7 ---
7
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.
PURPORT
The yogés should perform acts for the advancement of human society. There
are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to spiritual life.
The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to be one of these sacrifices.
It is called viväha-yajïa. Should a sannyäsé, who is in the renounced order of
life and who has given up his family relations, encourage the marriage
ceremony? The Lord says here that any sacrifice which is meant for human
welfare should never be given up. Viväha-yajïa, the marriage ceremony, is
meant to regulate the human mind to become peaceful for spiritual
advancement. For most men, this viväha-yajïa should be encouraged even by
persons in the renounced order of life. Sannyasés should never associate with
women, but that does not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a
young man, should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribed
sacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the lower
stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is for the purification of
the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons, as described previously, it leads
one to advanced spiritual life.
TEXT 6
WTaaNYaiPa Tau k-MaaRi<a Sa(r)& TYa¤-a f-l/aiNa c )
k-TaRVYaaNaqiTa Mae PaaQaR iNaiêTa& MaTaMautaMaMa( )) 6 ))
etäny api tu karmäëi
saìgaà tyaktvä phaläni ca
kartavyänéti me pärtha
niçcitaà matam uttamam


--- Page 8 ---
8
etäni—all 
this; 
api—certainly; 
tu—must; 
karmäëi—activities;
saìgam—association; 
tyaktvä—renouncing; 
phaläni—results; 
ca—also;
kartavyäni—as 
duty; 
iti—thus; 
me—My; 
pärtha—O 
son 
of 
Påthä;
niçcitam—definite; matam—opinion; uttamam—the best.
TRANSLATION
All these activities should be performed without any expectation of result.
They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Påthä. That is My final
opinion.
PURPORT
Although all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result by
such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant for material
advancement in life should be given up, but sacrifices that purify one's
existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane should not be stopped.
Everything that leads to Kåñëa consciousness must be encouraged. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam also it is said that any activity which leads to devotional
service to the Lord should be accepted. That is the highest criterion of religion.
A devotee of the Lord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice, or charity
which will help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord
TEXT 7
iNaYaTaSYa Tau SaNNYaaSa" k-MaR<aae NaaePaPaÛTae )
MaaehataSYa PairTYaaGaSTaaMaSa" Pairk-IiTaRTa" )) 7 ))
niyatasya tu sannyäsaù
karmaëo nopapadyate
mohät tasya parityägas


--- Page 9 ---
9
tämasaù parikértitaù
niyatasya—prescribed 
duties; 
tu—but; 
sannyäsaù—renunciation;
karmaëaù—activities; 
na—never; 
upapadyate—is 
deserved; 
mohät—by
illusion; tasya—of which; parityägaù—renunciation; tämasaù—in the mode of
ignorance; parikértitaù—declared.
TRANSLATION
Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives up his
prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
Work for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord and
offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are recommended. It
is said that a person in the renounced order of life should not cook for himself.
Cooking for oneself is prohibited, but cooking for the Supreme Lord is not
prohibited. Similarly, a sannyäsé may perform a marriage ceremony to help his
disciple in the advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. If one renounces such
activities, it is to be understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 8
du"%iMaTYaev YaTk-MaR k-aYa(c)e-Xa>aYaatYaJaeTa( )
Sa k*-Tva raJaSa& TYaaGa& NaEv TYaaGaf-l&/ l/>aeTa( )) 8 ))
duùkham ity eva yat karma
käya-kleça-bhayät tyajet
sa kåtvä räjasaà tyägaà
naiva tyäga-phalaà labhet


--- Page 10 ---
10
duùkham—unhappy; 
iti—thus; 
eva—certainly; 
yat—that 
which;
karma—work; käya—body; kleça—troublesome; bhayät—out of; tyajet—fear;
saù—that; 
kåtvä—after 
doing; 
räjasam—in 
the 
mode 
of 
passion;
tyägam—renunciation; 
na 
eva—certainly 
not; 
tyäga—renounced;
phalam—results; labhet—gain.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear, is said
to be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of
renunciation.
PURPORT
One who is in Kåñëa consciousness should not give up earning money out of
fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his
money in Kåñëa consciousness, or if by rising early in the morning one can
advance his transcendental Kåñëa consciousness, one should not desist out of
fear or because such activities are considered troublesome. Such renunciation
is in the mode of passion. The result of passionate work is always miserable.
Even if a person renounces work in that spirit, he never gets the result of
renunciation.
TEXT 9
k-aYaRiMaTYaev YaTk-MaR iNaYaTa& i§-YaTae_JauRNa )
Sa(r)& TYa¤-a f-l&/ cEv Sa TYaaGa" Saaitvk-ae MaTa" )) 9 ))
käryam ity eva yat karma
niyataà kriyate 'rjuna
saìgaà tyaktvä phalaà caiva


--- Page 11 ---
11
sa tyägaù sättviko mataù
käryam—must be done; iti—thus; eva—thus; yat—that which; karma—work;
niyatam—prescribed; 
kriyate—performed; 
arjuna—O 
Arjuna;
saìgam—association; 
tyaktvä—giving 
up; 
phalam—result; 
ca—also;
eva—certainly; saù—that; tyägaù—renunciation; sättvikaù—in the mode of
goodness; mataù—in My opinion.
TRANSLATION
But he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be done,
and renounces all attachment to the fruit—his renunciation is of the nature of
goodness, O Arjuna.
PURPORT
Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the modes
of work. A man working in Kåñëa consciousness in a factory does not associate
himself with the work of the factory, nor with the workers of the factory. He
simply works for Kåñëa. And when he gives up the result for Kåñëa, he is acting
transcendentally.
TEXT 10
Na Üeíyku-Xal&/ k-MaR ku-Xale/ NaaNauzÂTae )
TYaaGaq SatvSaMaaivíae MaeDaavq i^àSa&XaYa" )) 10 ))
na dveñöy akuçalaà karma
kuçale nänuñajjate
tyägé sattva-samäviñöo
medhävé chinna-saàçayaù


--- Page 12 ---
12
na—never; dveñöi—hates; akuçalam—inauspicious; karma—work; kuçale—in
auspicious; na—nor; anuñajjate—becomes attached; tyägé—the renouncer;
sattva—goodness; samäviñöaù—absorbed in; medhävé—intelligent; chinna—cut
up; saàçayaù—all doubts.
TRANSLATION
Those who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate
inauspicious work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubts about
work.
PURPORT
It is said in Bhagavad-gétä that one can never give up work at any time.
Therefore he who works for Kåñëa and does not enjoy the fruitive results, who
offers everything to Kåñëa, is actually a renouncer. There are many members of
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who work very hard in
their office or in the factory or some other place, and whatever they earn they
give to the Society. Such highly elevated souls are actually sannyäsés and are
situated in the renounced order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to
renounce the fruits of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.
TEXT 11
Na ih deh>a*Taa XaKYa& TYa¢u-& k-MaaR<YaXaezTa" )
YaSTau k-MaRf-l/TYaaGaq Sa TYaaGaqTYai>aDaqYaTae )) 11 ))
na hi deha-bhåtä çakyaà
tyaktuà karmäëy açeñataù
yas tu karma-phala-tyägé
sa tyägéty abhidhéyate


--- Page 13 ---
13
na—never; hi—certainly; deha-bhåtä—of the embodied; çakyam—possible;
tyaktum—to renounce; karmäëi—activities of; açeñataù—altogether; yaù
tu—anyone who; karma—work; phala—result; tyägé—renouncer; saù—he;
tyägé—the renouncer; iti—thus; abhidhéyate—it is said.
TRANSLATION
It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities.
Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits of action is one who has
truly renounced.
PURPORT
A person in Kåñëa consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Kåñëa is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or suffer
the results of his acts after death.
TEXT 12
AiNaíiMaí& iMaé[& c i}aivDa& k-MaR<a" f-l/Ma( )
>avTYaTYaaiGaNaa& Pa[eTYa Na Tau SaNNYaaiSaNaa& KvicTa( )) 12 ))
aniñöam iñöaà miçraà ca
tri-vidhaà karmaëaù phalam
bhavaty atyäginäà pretya
na tu sannyäsinäà kvacit
aniñöam—leading to hell; iñöam—leading to heaven; miçram ca—or mixture;
tri-vidham—three kinds; karmaëaù—work; phalam—result; bhavati—becomes;
atyäginäm—of the renouncer; pretya—after death; na tu—but not;


--- Page 14 ---
14
sannyäsinäm—of the renounced order; kvacit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action—desirable,
undesirable and mixed—accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced
order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.
PURPORT
A person in Kåñëa consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate
anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place
and at the proper time without fearing the troublesome effects of his duty.
Such a person situated in transcendence should be understood to be most
intelligent and beyond all doubts in his activities.


--- Page 15 ---
15


--- Page 16 ---
16
TEXTS 13-14
PaÄETaaiNa Mahabahae k-ar<aaiNa iNabaeDa Mae )
Saa&:Yae k*-TaaNTae Pa[ae¢-aiNa iSaÖYae SavRk-MaR<aaMa( )) 13 ))
AiDaïaNa& TaQaa k-TaaR k-r<a& c Pa*QaiGvDaMa( )
ivivDaaê Pa*QaKceía dEv& cEva}a PaÄMaMa( )) 14 ))
païcaitäni mahä-bäho
käraëäni nibodha me
säìkhye kåtänte proktäni
siddhaye sarva-karmaëäm
adhiñöhänaà tathä kartä
karaëaà ca påthag-vidham
vividhäç ca påthak ceñöä
daivaà caivätra païcamam
païca—five; 
etäni—all 
these; 
mahä-bäho—O 
mighty-armed 
one;
käraëäni—cause; nibodha—just understand; me—from Me; säìkhye—in the
Vedas; kåtänte—after performance; proktäni—said; siddhaye—perfection;
sarva—all; 
karmaëäm—actuated; 
adhiñöhänam—place; 
tathä—also;
kartä—worker; karaëam ca—and instruments; påthak-vidham—different
kinds; 
vividhäù 
ca—varieties; 
påthak—separately; 
ceñöäù—endeavor;
daivam—the Supreme; ca—also; eva—certainly; atra—here; païcamam—five.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring about
the accomplishment of all action. These are declared in säìkhya philosophy to
be the place of action, the performer, the senses, the endeavor, and ultimately
the Supersoul.


--- Page 17 ---
17
PURPORT
A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have some
reaction, how is it that the person in Kåñëa consciousness does not suffer or
enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedänta philosophy to show
how this is possible. He says that there are five causes for all activities and for
success in all activity, and one should know these five causes. Säìkhya means
the stalk of knowledge, and Vedänta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by
all leading äcäryas. Even Çaìkara accepts Vedänta-sütra as such. Therefore
such authority should be consulted.
The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in the Gétä,
"sarvasya cähaà hådi." He is engaging everyone in certain activities. Acts done
under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in this life or in the
life after death.
The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul acts in
various ways, and for each and every action there is a different endeavor. But
all one's activities depend on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the
heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the super cause. Under these
circumstances, he who is acting in Kåñëa consciousness under the direction of
the Supersoul situated within the heart is naturally not bound by any activity.
Those in complete Kåñëa consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their
actions. Everything is dependant on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 15
Xarqrvax(MaNaaei>aYaRTk-MaR Pa[ar>aTae Nar" )


--- Page 18 ---
18
NYaaYYa& va ivParqTa& va PaÄETae TaSYa heTav" )) 15 ))
çaréra-väìmanobhir yat
karma prärabhate naraù
nyäyyaà vä viparétaà vä
païcaite tasya hetavaù
çaréra—body; 
väk—speech; 
manobhiù—by 
the 
mind; 
yat—anything;
karma—work; prärabhate—begins; naraù—a person; nyäyyam—right; vä—or;
viparétam—the opposite; vä—or; païca—five; ete—all these; tasya—its;
hetavaù—causes.
TRANSLATION
Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is
caused by these five factors.
PURPORT
The words "right" and "wrong" are very significant in this verse. Right work
is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and wrong
work is work done against the principles of the scriptural injunctions. But
whatever is done requires these five factors for its complete performance.
Collier
TEXT 16
Ta}aEv& SaiTa k-TaaRrMaaTMaaNa& ke-vl&/ Tau Ya" )
PaXYaTYak*-TabuiÖTvaà Sa PaXYaiTa duMaRiTa" )) 16 ))
tatraivaà sati kartäram


--- Page 19 ---
19
ätmänaà kevalaà tu yaù
paçyaty akåta-buddhitvän
na sa paçyati durmatiù
tatra—there; evam—certainly; sati—being thus; kartäram—of the worker;
ätmänam—the soul; kevalam—only; tu—but; yaù—anyone; paçyati—sees;
akåta-buddhitvät—due to unintelligence; na—never; saù—he; paçyati—sees;
durmatiù—foolish.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five
factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.
PURPORT
A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend
within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes are the place,
the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause is the Supreme, the
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see not only the four material
causes, but the supreme efficient cause as well. One who does not see the
Supreme thinks himself to be the instrument.
TEXT 17
YaSYa Naah&k*/=Taae >aavae buiÖYaRSYa Na il/PYaTae )
hTvaiPa Sa wMaamçaek-aà hiNTa Na iNabDYaTae )) 17 ))
yasya nähaìkåto bhävo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatväpi sa imäû lokän
na hanti na nibadhyate


--- Page 20 ---
20
yasya—of one who; na—never; ahaìkåtaù—false ego; bhävaù—nature;
buddhiù—intelligence; yasya—one who; na—never; lipyate—is attached; hatvä
api—even 
killing; 
saù—he; 
imän—this; 
lokän—world; 
na—never;
hanti—kills; na—never; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,
though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is he bound by his
actions.
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight arises from
false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not
consider the Supreme sanction within and without. If one does not know that
a super sanction is there, why should he act? But one who knows the
instrument of work, himself as the worker, and the Supreme Lord as the
supreme sanctioner, is perfect in doing everything. Such a person is never in
illusion. Personal activity and responsibility arise from false ego and
godlessness, or a lack of Kåñëa consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Kåñëa
consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, even though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with the
reaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a superior
officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal
account, then he is certainly judged by a court of law.
TEXT 18
jaNa& jeYa& PairjaTaa i}aivDaa k-MaRcaedNaa )


--- Page 21 ---
21
k-r<a& k-MaR k-TaeRiTa i}aivDa" k-MaRSa°h" )) 18 ))
jïänaà jïeyaà parijïätä
tri-vidhä karma-codanä
karaëaà karma karteti
tri-vidhaù karma-saìgrahaù
jïänam—knowledge; 
jïeyam—objective; 
parijïätä—the 
knower;
tri-vidhä—three kinds; karma—work; codanä—impetus; karaëam—the senses;
karma—work; 
kartä—the 
doer; 
iti—thus; 
tri-vidhaù—three 
kinds;
karma—work; saìgrahaù—accumulation.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors
which motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise the threefold
basis of action.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object of
knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself and the
worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by any human
being has these elements. Before one acts, there is some impetus, which is
called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle
form of work. Then work takes the form of action. First one has to undergo the
psychological processes of thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called
impetus. Actually the faith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration
to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of the
spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is there, then
actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. The mind is the center of
all senses, and the object is work itself. These are the different phases of work


--- Page 22 ---
22
as described in Bhagavad-gétä. The sum total of all activities is called
accumulation of work.
TEXT 19
jaNa& k-MaR c k-TaaR c i}aDaEv Gau<a>aedTa" )
Pa[aeCYaTae Gau<aSa&:YaaNae YaQaavC^*<au TaaNYaiPa )) 19 ))
jïänaà karma ca kartä ca
tridhaiva guëa-bhedataù
procyate guëa-saìkhyäne
yathävac chåëu täny api
jïänam—knowledge; 
karma—work; 
ca—also; 
kartä—worker; ca—also;
tridhä—three kinds; eva—certainly; guëa-bhedataù—in terms of different
modes of material nature; procyate—is said; guëa-saìkhyäne—in terms of
different modes; yathävat—as they act; çåëu—hear; täni—all of them;
api—also.
TRANSLATION
In accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three kinds
of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as I describe them.
PURPORT
In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the mode of
goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic, and the mode of
ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the modes of material
nature are binding; they are not sources of liberation. Even in the mode of
goodness one is conditioned. In the Seventeenth Chapter, the different types


--- Page 23 ---
23
of worship by different types of men in different modes of material nature were
described. In this verse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of
knowledge, workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.
TEXT 20
SavR>aUTaezu YaeNaEk&- >aavMaVYaYaMaq+aTae )
Aiv>a¢&- iv>a¢e-zu TaJjaNa& iviÖ Saaitvk-Ma( )) 20 ))
sarva-bhüteñu yenaikaà
bhävam avyayam ékñate
avibhaktaà vibhakteñu
taj jïänaà viddhi sättvikam
sarva-bhüteñu—in 
all 
living 
entities; 
yena—by 
whom; 
ekam—one;
bhävam—situation; 
avyayam—imperishable; 
ékñate—does 
see;
avibhaktam—undivided; vibhakteñu—in the numberless divided; tat—that;
jïänam—knowledge; viddhi—knows; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod,
human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the
mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although they
have different bodies in terms of their previous work. As described in the
Seventh Chapter, the manifestation of the living force in every body is due to
the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature,


--- Page 24 ---
24
that living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living
energy is imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference is
perceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of material
existence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided. Such
impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.
TEXT 21
Pa*Qa¤e-Na Tau YaJjaNa& NaaNaa>aavaNPa*QaiGvDaaNa( )
veita SaveRzu >aUTaezu TaJjaNa& iviÖ raJaSaMa( )) 21 ))
påthaktvena tu yaj jïänaà
nänä-bhävän påthag-vidhän
vetti sarveñu bhüteñu
taj jïänaà viddhi räjasam
påthaktvena—because of division; tu—but; yat jïänam—which knowledge;
nänä-bhävän—multifarious situations; påthak-vidhän—differently; vetti—one
who knows; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; tat jïänam—that
knowledge; viddhi—must be known; räjasam—in terms of passion.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be
dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with the
destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge
in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge, bodies differ from one
another because of the development of different types of consciousness,


--- Page 25 ---
25
otherwise there is no separate soul which manifests consciousness. The body is
itself the soul, and there is no separate soul beyond this body. According to
such knowledge, consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual
souls, but there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body there is
no special individual or Supreme Soul. All such conceptions are considered
products of the mode of passion.
TEXT 22
Yatau k*-Tòvdek-iSMaNk-aYaeR Sa¢-MahETauk-Ma( )
ATatvaQaRvdLPa& c TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 22 ))
yat tu kåtsnavad ekasmin
kärye saktam ahaitukam
atattvärthavad alpaà ca
tat tämasam udähåtam
yat—that which; tu—but; kåtsnavat—all in all; ekasmin—in one; kärye—work;
saktam—attached; ahaitukam—without cause; atattva-arthavat—without
reality; alpam ca—and very meager; tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of
darkness; udähåtam—is spoken.
TRANSLATION
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all
in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in
the mode of darkness.
PURPORT
The "knowledge" of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or


--- Page 26 ---
26
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into the mode
of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the authorities or
scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to the body. He is not
concerned about acting in terms of the directions of scripture. For him God is
money, and knowledge means the satisfaction of bodily demands. Such
knowledge has no connection with the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like
the knowledge of the ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping,
defending and mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the
mode of darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond
this body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledge
producing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and mental
speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledge concerned
with only keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 23
iNaYaTa& Sa(r)rihTaMaraGaÜezTa" k*-TaMa( )
Af-l/Pa[ePSauNaa k-MaR YataTSaaitvk-MauCYaTae )) 23 ))
niyataà saìga-rahitam
aräga-dveñataù kåtam
aphala-prepsunä karma
yat tat sättvikam ucyate
niyatam—regulative; 
saìga-rahitam—without 
attachment;
aräga-dveñataù—without 
love 
or 
hatred; 
kåtam—done;
aphala-prepsunä—without fruitive result; karma—acts; yat—that which;
tat—that; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 27 ---
27
As for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed
without attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renounced fruitive
results, is called action in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Regulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms of the
different orders and divisions of society, performed without attachment or
proprietary rights and therefore without any love or hatred and performed in
Kåñëa consciousness for the satisfaction of the Supreme, without
self-satisfaction or self-gratification, are called actions in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
Yatau k-aMaePSauNaa k-MaR Saahªare<a va PauNa" )
i§-YaTae bhul/aYaaSa& Tad]aJaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 24 ))
yat tu kämepsunä karma
sähaìkäreëa vä punaù
kriyate bahuläyäsaà
tad räjasam udähåtam
yat—that which; tu—but; käma-épsunä—with fruitive result; karma—work;
sähaìkäreëa—with 
ego; 
vä—or; 
punaù—again; 
kriyate—performed;
bahula-äyäsam—with great labor; tat—that; räjasam—in the mode of passion;
udähåtam—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires,
and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of


--- Page 28 ---
28
passion.
TEXT 25
ANaubNDa& +aYa& ih&SaaMaNaPae+Ya c PaaEåzMa( )
Maaehadar>YaTae k-MaR YatataaMaSaMauCYaTae )) 25 ))
anubandhaà kñayaà hiàsäm
anapekñya ca pauruñam
mohäd ärabhyate karma
yat tat tämasam ucyate
anubandham—future 
bondage; 
kñayam—distracted; 
hiàsäm—violence;
anapekñya—without 
consideration 
of 
consequences; 
ca—also;
pauruñam—distressing to others; mohät—by illusion; ärabhyate—begun;
karma—work; yat—that; tat—which; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance;
ucyate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that action performed in ignorance and delusion without consideration
of future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injury and is impractical, is
said to be action in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
One has to give account of one's actions to the state or to the agents of the
Supreme Lord called the Yamadütas. Irresponsible work is distraction because
it destroys the regulative principles of scriptural injunction. It is often based on
violence and is distressing to other living entities. Such irresponsible work is
carried out in the light of one's personal experience. This is called illusion. And


--- Page 29 ---
29
all such illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 26
Mau¢-Sa(r)ae_Nah&vadq Da*TYauTSaahSaMaiNvTa" )
iSaÖyiSaÖyaeiNaRivRk-ar" k-TaaR Saaitvk- oCYaTae )) 26 ))
mukta-saìgo 'nahaà-vädé
dhåty-utsäha-samanvitaù
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikäraù
kartä sättvika ucyate
mukta-saìgaù—liberated from all material association; anaham-vädé—without
false ego; dhåti-utsäha—with great enthusiasm; samanvitaù—qualified in that
way; siddhi—perfection; asiddhyoù—failure; nirvikäraù—without change;
kartä—worker; sättvikaù—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who is
enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success or failure, is a worker
in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A person in Kåñëa consciousness is always transcendental to the material
modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the work entrusted to
him because he is above false ego and pride. Still, he is always enthusiastic till
the completion of such work. He does not worry about the distress undertaken;
he is always enthusiastic. He does not care for success or failure; he is equal
both in distress or happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of


--- Page 30 ---
30
goodness.
TEXT 27
raGaq k-MaRf-l/Pa[ePSaulu/RBDaae ih&SaaTMak-ae_éuic" )
hzRXaaek-aiNvTa" k-TaaR raJaSa" Pairk-IiTaRTa" )) 27 ))
rägé karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho hiàsätmako 'çuciù
harña-çokänvitaù kartä
räjasaù parikértitaù
rägé—very much attached; karma-phala—to the fruit of the work;
prepsuù—desiring; lubdhaù—greedy; hiàsä-ätmakaù—and always envious;
açuciù—unclean; harña-çoka-anvitaù—complicated, with joy and sorrow;
kartä—such a worker; räjasaù—in the mode of passion; parikértitaù—is
declared.
TRANSLATION
But that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who
passionately wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure and moved
by happiness and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
A person is too much attached to certain kind of work or to the result
because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and home, wife
and children. Such a person has no desire for higher elevation of life. He is
simply concerned with making this world as materially comfortable as possible.
He is generally very greedy, and he thinks that anything attained by him is
permanent and never to be lost. Such a person is envious of others and


--- Page 31 ---
31
prepared to do anything wrong for sense gratification. Therefore such a person
is unclean, and he does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is
very happy if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is
not successful. Such is a man in the mode of passion.
TEXT 28
AYau¢-" Pa[ak*-Ta" STaBDa" Xa#=ae NaEZk*-iTak-ae_l/Sa" )
ivzadq dqgaRSaU}aq c k-TaaR TaaMaSa oCYaTae )) 28 ))
ayuktaù präkåtaù stabdhaù
çaöho naiñkåtiko 'lasaù
viñädé dérgha-sütré ca
kartä tämasa ucyate
ayuktaù—without 
reference 
to 
the 
scriptural 
injunctions;
präkåtaù—materialistic; 
stabdhaù—obstinate; 
çaöhaù—deceitful;
naiñkåtikaù—expert in 
insulting 
others; 
alasaù—lazy; 
viñädé—morose;
dérgha-sütré—procrastinating; ca—also; kartä—worker; tämasaù—in the mode
of ignorance; ucyate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunction of the
scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting others,
who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, is a worker in the mode of
ignorance.
PURPORT
In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be performed
and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who do not care for


--- Page 32 ---
32
those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and such persons are
generally materialistic. They work according to the modes of nature, not
according to the injunctions of the scripture. Such workers are not very gentle,
and generally they are always cunning and expert in insulting others. They are
very lazy; even though they have some duty, they do not do it properly, and
they put it aside to be done later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They
procrastinate; anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years.
Such workers are situated in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 29
buÖe>aeRd& Da*TaeêEv Gau<aTaiñivDa& é*<au )
Pa[aeCYaMaaNaMaXaeze<a Pa*Qa¤e-Na DaNaÅYa )) 29 ))
buddher bhedaà dhåteç caiva
guëatas tri-vidhaà çåëu
procyamänam açeñeëa
påthaktvena dhanaïjaya
buddheù—of 
intelligence; 
bhedam—differences; 
dhåteù—of 
steadiness;
ca—also; eva—certainly; guëataù—by the modes of material nature;
tri-vidham—the three kinds of; çåëu—just hear; procyamänam—as described
by Me; açeñeëa—in detail; påthaktvena—differently; dhanaïjaya—O winner of
wealth.
TRANSLATION
Now, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the three
kinds of understanding and determination according to the three modes of
nature.


--- Page 33 ---
33
PURPORT
Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower,
in three different divisions according to modes of material nature, the Lord is
explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker in the same way.
TEXT 30
Pa[v*ita& c iNav*ita& c k-aYaaRk-aYaeR >aYaa>aYae )
bNDa& Maae+a& c Yaa veita buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR Saaitvk-I )) 30 ))
pravåttià ca nivåttià ca
käryäkärye bhayäbhaye
bandhaà mokñaà ca yä vetti
buddhiù sä pärtha sättviké
pravåttim—deserving; 
ca—also; 
nivåttim—not 
deserving; 
kärya—work;
akärye—reaction; bhaya—fearful; abhaye—fearlessness; bandham—obligation;
mokñam 
ca—and 
liberation; 
yä—that 
which; 
vetti—knows;
buddhiù—understanding; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; sättviké—in the
mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Påthä, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be
feared, what is binding and what is liberating, that understanding is established
in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Actions which are performed in terms of the directions of the scriptures are


--- Page 34 ---
34
called pravåtti, or actions that deserve to be performed, and actions which are
not so directed are not to be performed. One who does not know the scriptural
directions becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work.
Understanding which discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of
goodness.
TEXT 31
YaYaa DaMaRMaDaMa| c k-aYa| cak-aYaRMaev c )
AYaQaavTPa[JaaNaaiTa buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR raJaSaq )) 31 ))
yayä dharmam adharmaà ca
käryaà cäkäryam eva ca
ayathävat prajänäti
buddhiù sä pärtha räjasé
yayä—by which; dharmam—principles of religion; adharmam ca—and
irreligion; käryam—work; ca—also; akäryam—what ought not to be done;
eva—certainly; 
ca—also; 
ayathävat—not 
perfectly; 
prajänati—knows;
buddhiù—intelligence; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; räjasé—in the mode
of passion.
TRANSLATION
And that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious way
of life and the irreligious, between action that should be done and action that
should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son of Påthä, is in the
mode of passion.
PURPORT
Intelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It accepts


--- Page 35 ---
35
religions which are not actually religions and rejects actual religion. All views
and activities are misguided. Men of passionate intelligence understand a great
soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul. They think
truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In all activities they simply
take the wrong path; therefore their intelligence is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 32
ADaMa| DaMaRiMaiTa Yaa MaNYaTae TaMaSaav*Taa )
SavaRQaaRiNvParqTaa&ê buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR TaaMaSaq )) 32 ))
adharmaà dharmam iti yä
manyate tamasävåtä
sarvärthän viparétäàç ca
buddhiù sä pärtha tämasé
adharmam—irreligion; 
dharmam—religion; 
iti—thus; 
yä—which;
manyate—thinks; tamasä—by illusion; ävåtä—covered; sarva-arthän—all
things; viparétän—the wrong direction; ca—also; buddhiù—intelligence;
sa—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; tämasé—the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to
be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the
wrong direction, O Pärtha, is in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 33
Da*TYaa YaYaa DaarYaTae MaNa"Pa[a<aeiNd]Yai§-Yaa" )


--- Page 36 ---
36
YaaeGaeNaaVYai>acair<Yaa Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR Saaitvk-I )) 33 ))
dhåtyä yayä dhärayate
manaù-präëendriya-kriyäù
yogenävyabhicäriëyä
dhåtiù sä pärtha sättviké
dhåtyä—determination; 
yayä—by 
which; 
dhärayate—is 
sustained;
manaù—mind; präëa—life; indriya—senses; kriyäù—activities; yogena—by
yoga
practice; 
avyabhicäriëyä—without 
any 
break; 
dhåtiù—such
determination; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; sättviké—in the mode of
goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Påthä, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained
with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls the mind, life, and the acts
of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily fixed
in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one's mind, life and
sensual activities on the Supreme, engages in Kåñëa consciousness. That sort of
determination is in the mode of goodness. The word avyabhicäriëya is very
significant, for it refers to persons who are engaged in Kåñëa consciousness and
are never deviated by any other activity.
TEXT 34
YaYaa Tau DaMaRk-aMaaQaaRNDa*TYaa DaarYaTae_JauRNa )


--- Page 37 ---
37
Pa[Sa(r)eNa f-l/ak-a¿q Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR raJaSaq )) 34 ))
yayä tu dharma-kämärthän
dhåtyä dhärayate 'rjuna
prasaìgena phaläkäìkñé
dhåtiù sä pärtha räjasé
yayä—by which; tu—but; dharma-käma-arthän—for religiosity and economic
development; dhåtyä—by determination; dhärayate—in such terms; arjuna—O
Arjuna; 
prasaìgena—for that; phala-äkäìkñé—desiring fruitive result;
dhåtiù—determination; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; räjasé—in the mode
of passion.
TRANSLATION
And that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive result in religion,
economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O
Arjuna.
PURPORT
Any person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and whose mind,
life and senses are thus engaged, is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 35
YaYaa SvPan& >aYa& Xaaek&- ivzad& MadMaev c )
Na ivMauÄiTa duMaeRDaa Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR TaaMaSaq )) 35 ))
yayä svapnaà bhayaà çokaà
viñädaà madam eva ca


--- Page 38 ---
38
na vimuïcati durmedhä
dhåtiù sä pärtha tämasé
yayä—by 
which; 
svapnam—dream; 
bhayam—fearfulness;
çokam—lamentation; viñädam—moroseness; madam—illusion; eva—certainly;
ca—also; na—never; vimuïcati—is liberated; durmedhäù—unintelligent;
dhåtiù—determination; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; tämasé—in the
mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness, and illusion—such unintelligent determination is in
the mode of darkness.
PURPORT
It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does not
dream. Here dream means too much sleep. Dream is always present; either in
the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dream is a natural occurrence. But
those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot avoid the pride of enjoying
material objects and who are always dreaming of lording it over the material
world, whose life, mind, and senses are thus engaged, are considered to be in
the mode of ignorance.
TEXTS 36-37
Sau%& iTvdaNaq& i}aivDa& é*<au Mae >arTazR>a )
A>YaaSaad]MaTae Ya}a du"%aNTa& c iNaGaC^iTa )) 36 ))
YatadGa]e ivziMav Pair<aaMae_Ma*TaaePaMaMa( )


--- Page 39 ---
39
TaTSau%& Saaitvk&- Pa[ae¢-MaaTMabuiÖPa[SaadJaMa( )) 37 ))
sukhaà tv idänéà tri-vidhaà
çåëu me bharatarñabha
abhyäsäd ramate yatra
duùkhäntaà ca nigacchati
yat tad agre viñam iva
pariëäme 'måtopamam
tat sukhaà sättvikaà proktam
ätma-buddhi-prasäda-jam
sukham—happiness; 
tu—but; 
idäném—now; 
tri-vidham—three 
kinds;
çåëu—hear; me—from Me; bharatarñabha—O best amongst the Bhäratas;
abhyäsät—by practice; ramate—enjoyer; yatra—where; duùkha—distress;
antam—end; ca—also; nigacchati—gains; yat—that which; tat—that;
agre—in the beginning; viñam iva—like poison; pariëäme—at the end;
amåta—nectar; 
upamam—compared 
to; tat—that; sukham—happiness;
sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; proktam—is said; ätma—self;
buddhi—intelligence; prasäda-jam—satisfactory.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhäratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of
happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes comes
to the end of all distress. That which in the beginning may be just like poison
but at the end is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is
said to be happiness in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again. Thus
he chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of such enjoyment, he


--- Page 40 ---
40
becomes relieved from material entanglement by association with a great soul.
In other words, a conditioned soul is always engaged in some type of sense
gratification, but when he understands by good association that it is only a
repetition of the same thing, and he is awakened to his real Kåñëa
consciousness, he is sometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called
happiness.
In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and
regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the mind on
the Self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like poison, but if one is
successful in following the regulations and comes to the transcendental
position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he enjoys life.
TEXT 38
ivzYaeiNd]YaSa&YaaeGaaÛtadGa]e_Ma*TaaePaMaMa( )
Pair<aaMae ivziMav TaTSau%& raJaSa& SMa*TaMa( )) 38 ))
viñayendriya-saàyogäd
yat tad agre 'måtopamam
pariëäme viñam iva
tat sukhaà räjasaà småtam
viñaya—objects of sense; indriya—senses; saàyogät—combination; yat—that;
tat—which; agre—in the beginning; amåta-upamam—just like nectar;
pariëäme—at the end; viñam iva—like poison; tat—that; sukham—happiness;
räjasam—in the mode of passion; småtam—is considered.
TRANSLATION
That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects
and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the


--- Page 41 ---
41
nature of passion.
PURPORT
A young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young
man to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the beginning
this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or after some time, it
becomes just like poison. They are separated or there is divorce, there is
lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Such happiness is always in the mode of
passion. Happiness derived from a combination of the senses and the sense
objects is always a cause of distress and should be avoided by all means.
TEXT 39
YadGa]e caNaubNDae c Sau%& MaaehNaMaaTMaNa" )
iNad]al/SYaPa[MaadaeTQa& TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 39 ))
yad agre cänubandhe ca
sukhaà mohanam ätmanaù
nidrälasya-pramädotthaà
tat tämasam udähåtam
yat—that which; agre—in the beginning; ca—also; anubandhe—by binding;
ca—also; sukham—happiness; mohanam—illusion; ätmanaù—of the self;
nidrä—sleeping; älasya—laziness; pramäda—illusion; uttham—produced of;
tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance; udähåtam—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from
beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be


--- Page 42 ---
42
of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORT
One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the mode of
darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act is also in the
mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of ignorance, everything is
illusion. There is no happiness either in the beginning or the end. For the
person in the mode of passion there might be some kind of ephemeral
happiness in the beginning and at the end distress, but for the person in the
mode of ignorance there is only distress both in the beginning and at the end.
TEXT 40
Na TadiSTa Pa*iQaVYaa& va idiv devezu va PauNa" )
Satv& Pa[k*-iTaJaEMauR¢&- Yadei>a" SYaaiT}ai>aGauR<aE" )) 40 ))
na tad asti påthivyäà vä
divi deveñu vä punaù
sattvaà prakåti-jair muktaà
yad ebhiù syät tribhir guëaiù
na—not; tat—that; asti—there is; påthivyäm—within the universe; vä—or;
divi—in the higher planetary system; deveñu—amongst the demigods; vä—or;
punaù—again; sattvam—existence; prakåti-jaiù—under the influence of
material nature; muktam—liberated; yat—that; ebhiù—by this; syät—so
becomes; tribhiù—by three; guëaiù—modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher


--- Page 43 ---
43
planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of material
nature all over the universe.
TEXT 41
b]aø<a+ai}aYaivXaa& éUd]a<aa& c ParNTaPa )
k-MaaRi<a Pa[iv>a¢-aiNa Sv>aavPa[>avEGauR<aE" )) 41 ))
brähmaëa-kñatriya-viçäà
çüdräëäà ca parantapa
karmäëi pravibhaktäni
svabhäva-prabhavair guëaiù
brähmaëa—the brähmaëas; kñatriya—the kñatriyas; viçäm—the vaiçyas;
çüdräëäm—the çüdras; ca—and; parantapa—O subduer of the enemies;
karmäëi—activities; pravibhaktäni—are divided; svabhäva—own nature;
prabhavaiù—born of; guëaiù—by the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
Brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras are distinguished by their qualities
of work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with the modes of nature.
Bg 18.42
TEXT 42
TEXT
XaMaae dMaSTaPa" XaaEc& +aaiNTaraJaRvMaev c )


--- Page 44 ---
44
jaNa& ivjaNaMaaiSTaKYa& b]øk-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )) 42 ))
çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
kñäntir ärjavam eva ca
jïänaà vijïänam ästikyaà
brahma-karma svabhäva-jam
çamaù—peacefulness; damaù—self-control; tapaù—austerity; çaucam—purity;
kñäntiù—tolerance; 
ärjavam—honesty; 
eva—certainly; 
ca—and;
jïänam—wisdom; vijïänam—knowledge; ästikyam—religiousness; brahma—of
a brähmaëa; karma—duty; svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom,
knowledge, and religiousness—these are the qualities by which the brähmaëas
work.
Bg 18.43
TEXT 43
TEXT
XaaEYa| TaeJaae Da*iTadaR+Ya& YauÖe caPYaPal/aYaNaMa( )
daNaMaqìr>aavê +aa}a& k-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )) 43 ))
çauryaà tejo dhåtir däkñyaà
yuddhe cäpy apaläyanam
dänam éçvara-bhävaç ca
kñätraà karma svabhäva-jam
çauryam—heroism; 
tejaù—power; 
dhåtiù—determination;
däkñyam—resourcefulness; 
yuddhe—in 
battle; 
ca—and; 
api—also;
apaläyanam—not 
fleeing; 
dänam—generosity; 
éçvara—leadership;


--- Page 45 ---
45
bhävaù—nature; 
ca—and 
kñätram-kñatriya; 
karma—duty;
svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity, and leadership are the qualities of work for the kñatriyas.
Bg 18.44
TEXT 44
TEXT
k*-izGaaer+Yavai<aJYa& vEXYak-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )
PaircYaaRTMak&- k-MaR éUd]SYaaiPa Sv>aavJaMa( )) 44 ))
kåñi-gorakñya-väëijyaà
vaiçya-karma svabhäva-jam
paricaryätmakaà karma
çüdrasyäpi svabhäva-jam
kåñi—ploughing; 
go—cows; 
rakñya—protection; 
väëijyam—trade;
vaiçya-vaiçya; 
karma—duty; 
svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature;
paricaryä—service; ätmakam—nature; karma—duty; çüdrasya—of the çüdra;
api—also; svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Farming, cattle raising and business are the qualities of work for the vaiçyas,
and for the çüdras there is labor and service to others.
Bg 18.45
TEXT 45
TEXT


--- Page 46 ---
46
Sve Sve k-MaR<Yai>arTa" Sa&iSaiÖ& l/>aTae Nar" )
Svk-MaRiNarTa" iSaiÖ& YaQaa ivNdiTa TaC^*<au )) 45 ))
sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
saàsiddhià labhate naraù
svakarma-nirataù siddhià
yathä vindati tac chåëu
sve—own; 
sve—own; 
karmaëi—in 
work; 
abhirataù—following;
saàsiddhim—perfection; labhate—achieves; naraù—a man; svakarma—by his
own duty; nirataù—engaged; siddhim—perfection; yathä—as; vindati—attains,
tat—that; çåëu—listen.
TRANSLATION
By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.


--- Page 47 ---
47


--- Page 48 ---
48
TEXT 46
YaTa" Pa[v*ita>aURTaaNaa& YaeNa SavRiMad& TaTaMa( )
Svk-MaR<aa TaMa>YaCYaR iSaiÖ& ivNdiTa MaaNav" )) 46 ))
yataù pravåttir bhütänäà
yena sarvam idaà tatam
svakarmaëä tam abhyarcya
siddhià vindati mänavaù
yataù—from whom; pravåttiù—emanation; bhütänäm—of all living entities;
yena—by 
whom; 
sarvam—all; 
idam—this; 
tatam—is 
pervaded;
svakarmaëä—in his own duties; tam—Him; abhyarcya—by worshiping;
siddhim—perfection; vindati—achieves; mänavaù—a man.
TRANSLATION
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is
all-pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain perfection.
PURPORT
As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental parts
and parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such, the Supreme Lord is the beginning
of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedänta-sütra(1)—janmädy asya
yataù. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning of life of every living
entity. And the Supreme Lord, by His two energies, His external energy and
internal energy, is all-pervading. Therefore one should worship the Supreme
Lord with His energies. Generally the Vaiñëava devotees worship the Supreme
Lord with His internal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of
the internal energy. The external energy is a background, but the Supreme
Lord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramätmä is situated


--- Page 49 ---
49
everywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all animals,
everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord it is his duty to render service unto the Supreme. Everyone should be
engaged in devotional service to the Lord in full Kåñëa consciousness. That is
recommended in this verse.
Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation
by Håñékeça, the master of the senses. And, by the result of the work in which
one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, should be
worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in full Kåñëa consciousness, then,
by the grace of the Lord, he becomes fully aware of everything. That is the
perfection of life. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä, teñäm ahaà samuddhartä.
The Supreme Lord Himself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is
the highest perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if
he serves the Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.
TEXT 47
é[eYaaNSvDaMaaeR ivGau<a" ParDaMaaRTSvNauiïTaaTa( )
Sv>aaviNaYaTa& k-MaR ku-vRàaPanaeiTa ik-iLbzMa( )) 47 ))
çreyän sva-dharmo viguëaù
para-dharmät svanuñöhität
svabhäva-niyataà karma
kurvan näpnoti kilbiñam
sreyän—better; sva-dharmaù—one's own occupation; viguëaù—imperfectly
performed; para-dharmät—another's occupation; svanuñöhität—perfectly done;
svabhäva-niyatam—prescribed duties according to one's nature; karma—work;
kurvan—performing; na—never; äpnoti—achieve; kilbiñam—sinful reactions.


--- Page 50 ---
50
TRANSLATION
It is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may perform
it imperfectly, than to accept another's occupation and perform it perfectly.
Prescribed duties, according to one's nature, are never affected by sinful
reactions.
PURPORT
One's occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gétä. As already discussed
in previous verses, the duties of a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra are
prescribed according to the particular modes of nature. One should not imitate
another's duty. A man who is by nature attracted to the kind of work done by
çüdras should not artificially claim himself to be a brähmaëa, although he may
be born into a brähmaëa family. In this way one should work according to his
own nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of the Supreme
Lord. The occupational duty of a brähmaëa is certainly in the mode of
goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of goodness, he should
not imitate the occupational duty of a brähmaëa. For a kñatriya, or
administrator, there are so many abominable things; a kñatriya has to be violent
to kill his enemies, and sometimes a kñatriya has to tell lies for the sake of
diplomacy. Such violence and duplicity accompany political affairs, but a
kñatriya is not supposed to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the
duties of a brähmaëa.
One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a
kñatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such fighting is
performed for the sake of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there
need be no fear of degradation. In the business field also, sometimes a
merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit. If he does not do so, there
can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant says, "Oh, my dear customer, for you I
am making no profit," but one should know that without profit the merchant


--- Page 51 ---
51
cannot exist. Therefore it should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says
that he is not making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because
he is engaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he
should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brähmaëa. That is
not recommended. Whether one is a kñatriya, a vaiçya, or a çüdra doesn't
matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even
brähmaëas, who perform different types of sacrifice, sometimes must kill
animals because sometimes animals are sacrificed in such ceremonies.
Similarly, if a kñatriya engaged in his own occupation kills an enemy, there is
no sin incurred. In the Third Chapter these matters have been clearly and
elaborately explained; every man should work for the purpose of yajïa, or for
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense
gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone should be
engaged according to the particular mode of nature he has acquired, and he
should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 48
SahJa& k-MaR k-aENTaeYa SadaezMaiPa Na TYaJaeTa( )
SavaRrM>aa ih daeze<a DaUMaeNaaiGanirvav*Taa" )) 48 ))
saha-jaà karma kaunteya
sa-doñam api na tyajet
sarvärambhä hi doñeëa
dhümenägnir ivävåtäù
saha-jam—born simultaneously; karma—work; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
sa-doñam—with fault; api—although; na—never; tyajet—to be given up;
sarva-ärambhäù—any 
venture; 
hi—is 
certainly; 
doñeëa—with 
fault;
dhümena—with smoke; agniù—fire; iva—as; ävåtäù—covered.


--- Page 52 ---
52
TRANSLATION
Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is covered by
smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which is born of his nature,
O son of Kunté, even if such work is full of fault.
PURPORT
In conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brähmaëa, he has to perform sacrifices in which animal
killing is necessary. Similarly, a kñatriya, however pious he may be, has to fight
enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, a merchant, however pious he may be,
must sometimes hide his profit to stay in business, or he may sometimes have to
do business on the black market. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid
them. Similarly, even though a man is a çüdra serving a bad master, he has to
carry out the order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despite
these flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties, for they are
born out of his own nature.
A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still there is
smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there is smoke
in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of all elements. If one prefers
to give up the work of a kñatriya and take up the occupation of a brähmaëa, he
is not assured that in the occupation of a brähmaëa there are no unpleasant
duties. One may then conclude that in the material world no one can be
completely free from the contamination of material nature. This example of
fire and smoke is very appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one
takes a stone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other parts
of the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbing
conditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupation because
there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be determined to serve
the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Kåñëa consciousness. That is the


--- Page 53 ---
53
perfectional point. When a particular type of occupation is performed for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, all the defects in that particular occupation
are purified. When the results of work are purified, when connected with
devotional service, one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is
self-realization.
TEXT 49
ASa¢-buiÖ" SavR}a iJaTaaTMaa ivGaTaSPa*h" )
NaEZk-MYaRiSaiÖ& ParMaa& SaNNYaaSaeNaaiDaGaC^iTa )) 49 ))
asakta-buddhiù sarvatra
jitätmä vigata-spåhaù
naiñkarmya-siddhià paramäà
sannyäsenädhigacchati
asakta-buddhiù—unattached 
intelligence; 
sarvatra—everywhere;
jita-ätmä—control of the mind, vigata-spåhaù—without material desires;
naiñkarmya-siddhim—perfection 
of 
non-reaction; 
paramäm—supreme;
sannyäsena—by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati—attains.
TRANSLATION
One can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control and by
becoming unattached to material things and disregarding material enjoyments.
That is the highest perfectional stage of renunciation.
PURPORT
Real renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he has no right to enjoy the results of
his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, the results of his


--- Page 54 ---
54
work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This is actually Krñna
consciousness. The person acting in Kåñëa consciousness is really a sannyäsé,
one in the renounced order of life. By such mentality, one is satisfied because
he is actually acting for the Supreme. Thus he is not attached to anything
material; he becomes accustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond
the transcendental happiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyäsé
is supposed to be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person who
is in Kåñëa consciousness automatically attains this perfection without even
accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mind is called
yogärüòha, or the perfectional stage of yoga, as confirmed in the Third
Chapter: yas tv ätma-ratir eva syät. One who is satisfied in himself has no fear
of any kind of reaction from his activity.
TEXT 50
iSaiÖ& Pa[aáae YaQaa b]ø TaQaaPanaeiTa iNabaeDa Mae )
SaMaaSaeNaEv k-aENTaeYa iNaïa jaNaSYa Yaa Para )) 50 ))
siddhià präpto yathä brahma
tathäpnoti nibodha me
samäsenaiva kaunteya
niñöhä jïänasya yä parä
siddhim—perfection; präptaù—achieving; yathä—as; brahma—the Supreme;
tathä—so; äpnoti—achieves; nibodha—try to understand; me—from Me;
samäsena—summarily; 
eva—certainly; 
kaunteya—O 
son 
of 
Kunté;
niñöhä—stage; jïänasya—of knowledge; yä—which; parä—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunté, learn from Me in brief how one can attain to the supreme


--- Page 55 ---
55
perfectional stage, Brahman, by acting in the way which I shall now summarize.
PURPORT
The Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,
performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One attains the
supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result of his work for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the process of self-realization. Actual
perfection of knowledge is in attaining pure Kåñëa consciousness; that is
described in the following verses.
TEXTS 51-53
buÖya ivéuÖYaa Yau¢-ae Da*TYaaTMaaNa& iNaYaMYa c )
XaBdadqiNvzYaa&STYa¤-a raGaÜezaE VYaudSYa c )) 51 ))
iviv¢-Saevq l/gvaXaq YaTava¡-aYaMaaNaSa" )
DYaaNaYaaeGaParae iNaTYa& vEraGYa& SaMauPaaié[Ta" )) 52 ))
Ahªar& bl&/ dPa| k-aMa& §-aeDa& PairGa]hMa( )
ivMauCYa iNaMaRMa" XaaNTaae b]ø>aUYaaYa k-LPaTae )) 53 ))
buddhyä viçuddhayä yukto
dhåtyätmänaà niyamya ca
çabdädén viñayäàs tyaktvä
räga-dveñau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevé laghv-äçé
yata-väk-käya-mänasaù
dhyäna-yoga-paro nityaà
vairägyaà samupäçritaù


--- Page 56 ---
56
ahaìkäraà balaà darpaà
kämaà krodhaà parigraham
vimucya nirmamaù çänto
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
buddhyä—by the intelligence; viçuddhayä—fully purified; yuktaù—such
engagement; dhåtyä—determination; ätmänam—self; niyamya—regulated;
ca—also; çabdädén—the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; viñayän—sense
objects; 
tyaktvä—giving 
up; 
räga—attachments; 
dveñau—hatred;
vyudasya—having laid aside; ca—also; vivikta-sevé—living in a secluded place;
laghu-äçé—eating a small quantity; yata-väk—control of speech; käya—body;
mänasaù—control of the mind; dhyäna-yoga-paraù—always absorbed in
trance; 
nityam—twenty-four 
hours 
a 
day; 
vairägyam—detachment;
samupäçritaù—taken shelter of; ahaìkäram—false ego; balam—false strength;
darpam—false pride; kämam—lust; krodham—anger; parigraham—acceptance
of 
material 
things; 
vimucya—being 
delivered; 
nirmamaù—without
proprietorship; çäntaù—peaceful; brahma-bhüyäya—to become self-realized;
kalpate—is understood.
TRANSLATION
Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being freed from
attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats little and
who controls the body and the tongue, and is always in trance and is detached,
who is without false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and who does
not accept material things, such a person is certainly elevated to the position of
self-realization.
PURPORT
When one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of


--- Page 57 ---
57
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance.
Because he is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, he does not eat
more than what he requires, and he controls the activities of his body and
mind. He has no false ego because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor
has he a desire to make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material
things. Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is
satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he
is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to
acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he
becomes nonattached to all material things, and that is the stage of
self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called the brahma-bhüta stage. When
one is free from the material conception of life, he becomes peaceful and
cannot be agitated.
TEXT 54
b]ø>aUTa" Pa[SaàaTMaa Na XaaeciTa Na k-a¿iTa )
SaMa" SaveRzu >aUTaezu MaÙi¢&- l/>aTae ParaMa( )) 54 ))
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
brahma-bhütaù—being one with the Absolute; prasanna-ätmä—fully joyful;
na—never; çocati—laments; na—never; käìkñati—desires; samaù—equally
disposed; sarveñu—all; bhüteñu—living entity; mat-bhaktim—My devotional
service; labhate—gains; paräm—transcendental.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 58 ---
58
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally disposed
to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhüta stage, becoming one with
the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure devotee, one has
to go still further to become engaged in pure devotional service. This means
that one who is engaged in pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
already in a state of liberation, called brahma-bhüta, oneness with the
Absolute. Without being one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot
render service unto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference
between the served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higher
spiritual sense.
In the material concept of life, when one works for sense gratification, there
is misery, but in the absolute world, when one is engaged in pure devotional
service, there is no misery. The devotee in Kåñëa consciousness has nothing to
lament or desire. Since God is full, a living entity who is engaged in God's
service, in Kåñëa consciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a
river cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thought other
than Kåñëa, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for any material
loss or gain because he is full in service of the Lord. He has no desire for
material enjoyment because he knows that every living entity is the fragmental
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore eternally a servant. He does
not see, in the material world, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher
and lower positions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with
ephemeral appearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equal
value. This is the brahma-bhüta stage, and this stage is attained very easily by
the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea of becoming one with the
Supreme Brahman and annihilating one's individuality becomes hellish, and


--- Page 59 ---
59
the idea of attaining the heavenly kingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the
senses are like broken serpents' teeth. As there is no fear of a serpent with
broken teeth, so there is no fear from the senses when they are automatically
controlled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person, but for a
devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuëöha, or the spiritual sky. The
highest personality in this material universe is no more significant than an ant
for a devotee. Such a stage can be achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya,
who preached pure devotional service in this age.
Collier, [Madhya 8.65] [Madhya 24.132]
TEXT 55
>a¢-ya MaaMai>aJaaNaaiTa YaavaNYaêaiSMa TatvTa" )
TaTaae Maa& TatvTaae jaTva ivXaTae TadNaNTarMa( )) 55 ))
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
bhaktyä—by pure devotional service; mäm—Me; abhijänäti—one can know;
yävän—as 
much 
as; 
yaù 
ca asmi—as 
I 
am; tattvataù—in 
truth;
tataù—thereafter; 
mäm—Me; 
tattvataù—by 
truth; 
jïätvä—knowing;
viçate—enters; tat—thereafter; anantaram—after
TRANSLATION
One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.


--- Page 60 ---
60
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and His plenary portions
cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. If anyone
wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has to take to
pure devotional service under the guidance of a pure devotee. Otherwise, the
truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead will always be hidden. It is
already stated (nähaà prakäçaù) that He is not revealed to everyone. Everyone
cannot understand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation.
Only one who is actually engaged in Kåñëa consciousness and devotional
service can understand what Kåñëa is. University degrees are not helpful.
One who is fully conversant with the Kåñëa science becomes eligible to
enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Kåñëa. Becoming Brahman does
not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there, and as long as
devotional service exists, there must be God, the devotee, and the process of
devotional service. Such knowledge is never vanquished, even after liberation.
Liberation involves getting free from the concept of material life; in spiritual
life the same distinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pure
Kåñëa consciousness. One should not misunderstand that the word viçate,
"enters into Me," supports the monist theory that one becomes homogeneous
with the impersonal Brahman. No. Viçate means that one can enter into the
abode of the Supreme Lord in his individuality to engage in His association
and render service unto Him. For instance, a green bird enters a green tree not
to become one with the tree but to enjoy the fruits of the tree. Impersonalists
generally give the example of a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This
may be a source of happiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his
personal individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living
entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the ocean
is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the aquatics living in
the ocean depths.


--- Page 61 ---
61
Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand the
transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in truth. As it
is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotional service can one
understand. The same is confirmed here; one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by devotional service and enter into His kingdom.
After attainment of the brahma-bhüta stage of freedom from material
conceptions, devotional service begins by one's hearing about the Lord. When
one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhüta stage
develops, and material contamination-greediness and lust for sense
enjoyment-disappears. As lust and desires disappear from the heart of a
devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of the Lord, and by such
attachment he becomes free from material contamination. In that state of life
he can understand the Supreme Lord. This is the statement of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam also. Also after liberation the process of bhakti or
transcendental service continues. The Vedänta-sütra(2) confirms this:
äpräyaëät taträpi hi dåñöam. This means that after liberation the process of
devotional service continues. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, real devotional
liberation is defined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own
identity, his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already
explained: every living entity is the part and parcel fragmental portion of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position is to serve. After
liberation, this service is never stopped. Actual liberation is getting free from
misconceptions of life.
Collier, [BTG 1956]
TEXT 56
SavRk-MaaR<YaiPa Sada ku-vaR<aae MaÜyPaaé[Ya" )


--- Page 62 ---
62
MaTPa[SaadadvaPanaeiTa XaaìTa& PadMaVYaYaMa( )) 56 ))
sarva-karmäëy api sadä
kurväëo mad-vyapäçrayaù
mat-prasädäd aväpnoti
çäçvataà padam avyayam
sarva—all; 
karmäëi—activities; 
api—although; 
sadä—always;
kurväëaù—performing; mat—under My; vyapäçrayah—protection; mat—My;
prasädät—mercy; aväpnoti—achieves; säçvatam—eternal; padam—abode;
avyayam——imperishable.
TRANSLATION
Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My protection,
reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.
PURPORT
The word mad-vyapäçrayaù means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under the
direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual master.
There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always, twenty-four hours,
one hundred percent engaged in activities under the direction of the Supreme
Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged in Kåñëa consciousness the Lord is
very, very kind. In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the
transcendental abode, or Kåñëaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is
no doubt about it. In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is
eternal, imperishable and full of knowledge.
TEXT 57


--- Page 63 ---
63
ceTaSaa SavRk-MaaRi<a MaiYa SaNNYaSYa MaTPar" )
buiÖYaaeGaMauPaaié[TYa MaiÀta" SaTaTa& >av )) 57 ))
cetasä sarva-karmäëi
mayi sannyasya mat-paraù
buddhi-yogam upäçritya
maccittaù satataà bhava
cetasä—by intelligence; sarva-karmäni—all kinds of activities; mayi—unto
Me; 
sannyasya—giving 
up; 
mat-paraù—My 
protection;
buddhi-yogam—devotional 
activities; 
upäçritya—taking 
shelter 
of;
mat-cittaù—consciousness; satatam—twenty-four hours a day; bhava—just
become.
TRANSLATION
In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection.
In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.
PURPORT
When one acts in Kåñëa consciousness, he does not act as the master of the
world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under the direction of the
Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual independence. He acts only on the
order of the master. A servant acting on behalf of the supreme master has no
affection for profit and loss. He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms of
the order of the Lord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the
personal direction of Kåñëa, but, when Kåñëa is not present, how should one
act? If one acts according to the direction of Kåñëa in this book, as well as
under the guidance of the representative of Kåñëa, then the result will be the
same. The Sanskrit word mat-paraù is very important in this verse. It indicates
that one has no goal in life save and except acting in Kåñëa consciousness just


--- Page 64 ---
64
to satisfy Kåñëa. And, while working in that way, one should think of Kåñëa
only: "I have been appointed to discharge this particular duty by Kåñëa." While
acting in such a way, one naturally has to think of Kåñëa. This is perfect Kåñëa
consciousness. One should, however, note that, after doing something
whimsically, he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. That sort of
duty is not in the devotional service of Kåñëa consciousness. One should act
according to the order of Krñna. This is a very important point. That order of
Kåñëa comes through disciplic succession from the bona fide spiritual master.
Therefore the spiritual master's order should be taken as the prime duty of life.
If one gets a bona fide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then
his perfection of life in Kåñëa consciousness is guaranteed.
TEXT 58
MaiÀta" SavRduGaaRi<a MaTPa[SaadatairZYaiSa )
AQa cetvMahªaraà é[aeZYaiSa ivNax(+YaiSa )) 58 ))
mac-cittaù sarva-durgäëi
mat-prasädät tariñyasi
atha cet tvam ahaìkärän
na çroñyasi vinaìkñyasi
mat—My; 
cittaù—consciousness; 
sarva—all; 
durgäëi—impediments;
mat—My; 
prasädät—My 
mercy; 
tariñyasi—you 
will 
overcome;
atha—therefore; cet—if; tvam—you; ahaìkärät—by false ego; na—not;
çroñyasi—do not hear; vinaìkñyasi—then lose yourself.
TRANSLATION
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such


--- Page 65 ---
65
consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.
PURPORT
A person in full Kåñëa consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute the
duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom from
all anxiety. For one who acts in Kåñëa consciousness, Lord Kåñëa becomes the
most intimate friend. He always looks after His friend's comfort, and He gives
Himself to His friend, who is so devotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a
day to please the Lord. Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false
ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself
independant of the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under
strict material laws. But, as soon as he acts in Kåñëa consciousness, he is
liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very carefully
that one who is not active in Kåñëa consciousness is losing himself in the
material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No conditioned soul
actually knows what is to be done and what is not to be done, but a person who
acts in Kåñëa consciousness is free to act because everything is prompted by
Kåñëa from within and confirmed by the spiritual master.
TEXT 59
YadhªarMaaié[TYa Na YaaeTSYa wiTa MaNYaSae )
iMaQYaEz VYavSaaYaSTae Pa[k*-iTaSTva& iNaYaae+YaiTa )) 59 ))
yad ahaìkäram äçritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaiña vyavasäyas te
prakåtis tväà niyokñyati
yat—therefore; ahaìkäram—false ego; äçritya—taking shelter; na—not;


--- Page 66 ---
66
yotsya—shall fight; iti—thus; manyase—think; mithyä eñaù—this is all false;
vyavasäyah te—your determination; prakåtiù—material nature; tväm—you;
niyokñyati—will engage you.
TRANSLATION
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be
falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the kñatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he was fearing
that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends, there would be sinful
reactions. Actually he was considering himself master of his actions, as if he
were directing the good and bad results of such work. He forgot that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead was present there, instructing him to fight.
That is the forgetfulness of the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality
gives directions as to what is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in
Kåñëa consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain his
destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to take direction
from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of the spiritual master who is the
representative of God. One should act unhesitatingly to execute the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead—that will keep him safe under all
circumstances.
TEXT 60
Sv>aavJaeNa k-aENTaeYa iNabÖ" SveNa k-MaR<aa )


--- Page 67 ---
67
k-Tau| NaeC^iSa YaNMaaehaTk-irZYaSYavXaae_iPa TaTa( )) 60 ))
svabhäva-jena kaunteya
nibaddhaù svena karmaëä
kartuà necchasi yan mohät
kariñyasy avaço 'pi tat
sva-bhäva-jena—by 
one's 
own 
nature; 
kaunteya—O 
son 
of 
Kunté;
nibaddhaù—conditioned; 
svena—by 
one's 
own; 
karmaëä—activities;
kartum—to do; na—not; icchasi—like; yat—that; mohät—by illusion;
kariñyasi—you will act; avaçaù—imperceptibly; api—even; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But,
compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kunté.
PURPORT
If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he is
compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is under the
spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and is acting in that
way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under the direction of the
Supreme Lord becomes glorious.
TEXT 61
wRìr" SavR>aUTaaNaa& ôÕeXae_JauRNa iTaïiTa )
>a]aMaYaNSavR>aUTaaiNa YaN}aaæ!aiNa MaaYaYaa )) 61 ))
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà


--- Page 68 ---
68
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
éçvaraù—the 
Supreme 
Lord; 
sarva-bhütänäm—of 
all 
living 
entities;
håd-deçe—in the location of the heart; arjuna—O Arjuna; tiñöhati—resides;
bhrämayan—causing 
to 
travel; 
sarva-bhütäni—all 
living 
entities;
yantra—machine; ärüòhäni—being so placed; mäyayä—under the spell of
material energy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the
material energy.
PURPORT
Arjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to fight
was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Kåñëa instructed that the
individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, or He
Himself, Kåñëa, the localized Supersoul, sits in the heart directing the living
being. After changing bodies, the living entity forgets his past deeds, but the
Supersoul, as the knower of the past, present and future, remains the witness of
all his activities. Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by
this Supersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried by the
material body which is created in the material energy under the direction of
the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a particular type of body,
he has to work under the spell of that bodily situation. A person seated in a
high-speed motor car goes faster than one seated in a slower car, though the
living entities, the drivers, may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the
Supreme Soul, material nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular


--- Page 69 ---
69
type of living entity to work according to his past desires. The living entity is
not independant. One should not think himself independant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His control. Therefore
his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction of the next verse.
TEXT 62
TaMaev Xar<a& GaC^ SavR>aaveNa >aarTa )
TaTPa[SaadaTPara& XaaiNTa& SQaaNa& Pa[aPSYaiSa XaaìTaMa( )) 62 ))
tam eva çaraëaà gaccha
sarva-bhävena bhärata
tat-prasädät paräà çäntià
sthänaà präpsyasi çäçvatam
tam—unto 
Him; 
eva—certainly; 
çaraëam—surrender; 
gaccha—go;
sarva-bhävena—in all respects; bhärata—O son of Bharata; tat-prasädät—by
His 
grace; 
paräm—transcendental; 
çäntim—peace; 
sthänam—abode;
präpsyasi—you will get; çäçvatam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain
transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.
PURPORT
A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who is situated in everyone's heart, and that will relieve him from all
kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such surrender, one will not
only be released from all miseries in this life, but at the end he will reach the
Supreme God. The transcendental world is described in the Vedic literature as


--- Page 70 ---
70
tad viñëoù paramaà padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,
everything material is actually spiritual, but paramaà padam specifically refers
to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual sky or Vaikuëöha.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä it is stated: "Sarvasya cäham hådi
sanniviñöaù." The Lord is seated in everyone's heart, so this recommendation
that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting within means that one
should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Kåñëa has
already been accepted by Arjuna as the Supreme. He was accepted in the
Tenth Chapter as paraà brahma paraà dhäma. Arjuna has accepted Kåñëa as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the supreme abode of all living
entities, not only because of his personal experience but also because of the
evidences of great authorities like Närada, Asita, Devala and Vyäsa.
TEXT 63
wiTa Tae jaNaMaa:YaaTa& Gauùad(GauùTar& MaYaa )
ivMa*XYaETadXaeze<a YaQaeC^iSa TaQaa ku-å )) 63 ))
iti te jïänam äkhyätaà
guhyäd guhyataraà mayä
vimåçyaitad açeñeëa
yathecchasi tathä kuru
iti—thus; 
te—unto 
you; 
jïänam—knowledge; 
äkhyätam—described;
guhyät—confidential; guhyataram—still more confidential; mayä—by Me;
vimåçya—by 
deliberation; 
etat—that; 
açeñeëa—fully; 
yathä—as 
you;
icchasi—you like; tathä—that; kuru—perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge.


--- Page 71 ---
71
Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.
PURPORT
The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahmabhüta.
One who is in the brahma-bhüta condition is joyful; he never laments, nor does
he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge. Kåñëa also discloses
knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahman knowledge, knowledge of
Brahman, but it is superior.
Here Lord Kåñëa telIs Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does not
interfere with the little independence of the living entity. In Bhagavad-gétä,
the Lord has explained in all respects how one can elevate his living condition.
The best advice imparted to Arjuna is to surrender unto the Supersoul seated
within his heart. By right discrimination, one should agree to act according to
the order of the Supersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in
Kåñëa consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna is
being directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight. Surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interest of the living entities. It
is not for the interest of the Supreme. Before surrendering, one is free to
deliberate on this subject as far as the intelligence goes; that is the best way to
accept the instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such
instruction comes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide
representative of Kåñëa.
TEXT 64
SavRGauùTaMa& >aUYa" é*<au Mae ParMa& vc" )
wíae_iSa Mae d*!iMaiTa TaTaae v+YaaiMa Tae ihTaMa( )) 64 ))
sarva-guhyatamaà bhüyaù
çåëu me paramaà vacaù


--- Page 72 ---
72
iñöo 'si me dåòham iti
tato vakñyämi te hitam
sarva-guhyatamam—the most confidential; bhüyaù—again; çåëu—just hear;
me—from Me; paramam—the supreme; vacaù—instruction; isöaù asi—you are
very 
dear 
to 
Me; 
dåòham—very; 
iti—thus; 
tataù—therefore;
vakñyämi—speaking; te—for your; hitam—benefit.
TRANSLATION
Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you the most
confidential part of knowledge. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.
PURPORT
The Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul within
everyone's heart, and now He is giving the most confidential part of this
knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the
end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, "Just always think of Me." The same
instruction is repeated here to stress the essence of the teachings of
Bhagavad-gétä. This essence is not understood by a common man, but by one
who is actually very dear to Kåñëa, a pure devotee of Kåñëa. This is the most
important instruction in all Vedic literature. What Kåñëa is saying in this
connection is the most essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out
not only by Arjuna but by all living entities.
Collier, [Madhya 22.57-58]
TEXT 65
MaNMaNaa >av MaÙ¢-ae MaÛaJaq Maa& NaMaSku-å )


--- Page 73 ---
73
MaaMaevEZYaiSa SaTYa& Tae Pa[iTaJaaNae iPa[Yaae_iSa Mae )) 65 ))
manmanä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo 'si me
man-manäù—thinking of Me; bhava—just become; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee;
mat-yäjé—My worshiper; mäm—unto Me; namaskuru—offer your obeisances;
mäm—unto Me; eva—certainly; eñyasi—come; satyam—truly; te—to you;
pratijäne—I promise; prijaù—dear; asi—you are; me—My.
TRANSLATION
Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this
because you are My very dear friend.
PURPORT
The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a pure
devotee of Kåñëa and always think of Him and act for Him. One should not
become an official meditator. Life should be so molded that one will always
have the chance to think of Kåñëa. One should always act in such a way that
all his daily activities are in connection with Kåñëa. He should arrange his life
in such a way that throughout the twenty-four hours he cannot but think of
Kåñëa. And the Lord's promise is that anyone who is in such pure Kåñëa
consciousness will certainly return to the abode of Kåñëa, where he will be
engaged in the association of Kåñëa face to face. This most confidential part of
knowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Kåñëa.
Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to Kåñëa
and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.


--- Page 74 ---
74
These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Kåñëa—the
very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a beautiful face
and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions of Kåñëa found in the
Brahma-saàhitä and other literatures. One should fix his mind on this original
form of Godhead, Kåñëa. He should not even divert his attention to other
forms of the Lord. The Lord has multi-forms, as Viñëu, Näräyaëa, Räma,
Varäha, etc., but a devotee should concentrate his mind on the form that was
present before Arjuna. Concentration of the mind on the form of Kåñëa
constitutes the most confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to
Arjuna because Arjuna is the most dear friend of Kåñëa's.
Collier, [Madhya 22.57-58]
TEXT 66
SavRDaMaaRNPairTYaJYa MaaMaek&- Xar<a& v]Ja )
Ah& Tva& SavRPaaPae>Yaae Maae+aiYaZYaaiMa Maa éuc" )) 66 ))
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
sarva-dharmän—all varieties of religion; parityajya—abandoning; mäm—unto
Me; ekam—only; çaraëam—surrender; vraja—go; aham—I; tväm—you;
sarva—all; 
päpebhyaù—from 
sinful 
reactions; 
mokñayiñyämi—deliver;
mä—not; çucaù—worry.
TRANSLATION
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver


--- Page 75 ---
75
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.
PURPORT
The Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of religion,
knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul, knowledge of
the different types of orders and statuses of social life, knowledge of the
renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment, sense and mind control,
meditation, etc. He has described in so many ways different types of religion.
Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that Arjuna should give up
all the processes that have been explained to him; he should simply surrender
to Kåñëa. That surrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for the
Lord personally promises to protect him.
In the Eighth Chapter it was said that only one who has become free from
all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Kåñëa. Thus one may think
that unless he is free from all sinful reactions he cannot take to the
surrendering process. To such doubts it is here said that even if one is not free
from all sinful reactions, simply by the process of surrendering to Çré Kåñëa he
is automatically freed. There is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from
sinful reactions. One should unhesitatingly accept Kåñëa as the supreme savior
of all living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.
According to the devotional process, one should simply accept such
religious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotional service of the
Lord. One may perform a particular occupational duty according to his position
in the social order, but if by executing his duty one does not come to the point
of Kåñëa consciousness, all his activities are in vain. Anything that does not
lead to the perfectional stage of Kåñëa consciousness should be avoided. One
should be confident that in all circumstances Kåñëa will protect him from all
difficulties. There is no need of thinking how one should keep the body and
soul together. Kåñëa will see to that. One should always think himself helpless
and should consider Kåñëa the only basis for his progress in life. As soon as one


--- Page 76 ---
76
seriously engages himself in devotional service to the Lord in full Kåñëa
consciousness, at once he becomes freed from all contamination of material
nature. There are different processes of religion and purificatory processes by
cultivation of knowledge, meditation in the mystic yoga system, etc., but one
who surrenders unto Kåñëa does not have to execute so many methods. That
simple surrender unto Kåñëa will save him from unnecessarily wasting time.
One can thus make all progress at once and be freed from all sinful reaction.
One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Kåñëa. His name is Kåñëa
because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by the beautiful,
all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Kåñëa is fortunate. There are different kinds
of transcendentalists—some of them are attached to the impersonal Brahman
vision, some of them are attracted by the Supersoul feature, etc., but one who is
attracted to the personal feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and,
above all, one who is attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Kåñëa Himself, is the most perfect transcendentalist. In other words,
devotional service to Kåñëa, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part
of knowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gétä. Karma-yogés,
empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all called transcendentalists,
but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all. The particular words used here,
mä çucaù, "Don't fear, don't hesitate, don't worry," are very significant. One
may be perplexed as to how one can give up all kinds of religious forms and
simply surrender unto Kåñëa, but such worry is useless.
Collier, [Madhya 8.63, 9.265, 22.94]
TEXT 67
wd& Tae NaaTaPaSk-aYa Naa>a¢-aYa k-dacNa )
Na caéué[Uzve vaCYa& Na c Maa& Yaae_>YaSaUYaiTa )) 67 ))


--- Page 77 ---
77
idaà te nätapaskäya
näbhaktäya kadäcana
na cäçuçrüñave väcyaà
na ca mäà yo 'bhyasüyati
idam—this; te—you; na—never; atapaskäya—one who is not austere;
na—never; abhaktäya—one who is not a devotee; kadäcana—at any time;
na—never; ca—also; açuçrüñave—one who is not engaged in devotional
service; väcyam—to be spoken; na—never; ca—also; mäm—unto Me;
yaù—anyone; abhyasüyati—envious.
TRANSLATION
This confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious
of Me.
PURPORT
Persons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious process,
who have never attempted devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness, who
have not tended a pure devotee, and especially those who are conscious of
Kåñëa as a historical personality or who are envious of the greatness of Kåñëa,
should not be told this most confidential part of knowledge. It is, however,
sometimes found that even demoniac persons who are envious of Kåñëa,
worshiping Kåñëa in a different way, take to the profession of explaining
Bhagavad-gétä in a different way to make business, but anyone who desires
actually to understand Kåñëa must avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä.
Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gétä is not understandable to those who are
sensuous—even if one is not sensuous but is strictly following the disciplines
enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not a devotee, he also cannot
understand Kåñëa. Even when one poses himself as a devotee of Kåñëa, but is


--- Page 78 ---
78
not engaged in Kåñëa conscious activities, he also cannot understand Kåñëa.
There are many persons who envy Kåñëa because He has explained in
Bhagavad-gétä that He is the Supreme and that nothing is above Him or equal
to Him. There are many persons who are envious of Kåñëa. Such persons
should not be told of Bhagavad-gétä, for they cannot understand. There is no
possibility of faithless persons' understanding Bhagavad-gétä and Kåñëa.
Without understanding Kåñëa from the authority of a pure devotee, one should
not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gitä.
TEXT 68
Ya wd& ParMa& Gauù& MaÙ¢e-Zvi>aDaaSYaiTa )
>ai¢&- MaiYa Para& k*-Tva MaaMaevEZYaTYaSa&XaYa" )) 68 ))
ya idaà paramaà guhyaà
mad-bhakteñv abhidhäsyati
bhaktià mayi paräà kåtvä
mäm evaiñyaty asaàçayaù
yaù—anyone; 
idam—this; 
paramam—most; 
guhyam—confidential;
mat—Mine; 
bhakteñu—amongst 
devotees 
of; 
abhidhäsyati—explains;
bhaktim—devotional 
service; 
mayi—unto 
Me; 
paräm—transcendental;
kåtvä—having 
done; 
mäm—unto 
Me; 
eva—certainly; 
eñyati—comes;
asaàçayaù—without doubt.
TRANSLATION
For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service
is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.
PURPORT


--- Page 79 ---
79
Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gétä be discussed amongst the devotees
only, for those who are not devotees will neither understand Kåñëa nor
Bhagavad-gétä. Those who do not accept Kåñëa as He is and Bhagavad-gétä as it
is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gétä whimsically and become offenders.
Bhagavad-gétä should be explained to persons who are ready to accept Kåñëa as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees
only and not for philosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries
sincerely to present Bhagavad-gétä as it is will advance in devotional activities
and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure devotion,
he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 69
Na c TaSMaaNMaNauZYaezu k-iêNMae iPa[Yak*-taMa" )
>aivTaa Na c Mae TaSMaadNYa" iPa[YaTarae >auiv )) 69 ))
na ca tasmän manuñyeñu
kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù
bhavitä na ca me tasmäd
anyaù priyataro bhuvi
na—never; 
ca—and; 
tasmät—therefore; 
manuñyeñu—among 
mankind;
kaçcit—anyone; me—My; priya-kåttamaù—more dear; bhavitä—will become;
na—no; 
ca—and; 
me—My; 
tasmät—than 
him; 
anyaù—other;
priyataraù—dearer; bhuvi—in this world.
TRANSLATION
There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there
ever be one more dear.


--- Page 80 ---
80
TEXT 70
ADYaeZYaTae c Ya wMa& DaMYa| Sa&vadMaavYaae" )
jaNaYajeNa TaeNaahiMaí" SYaaiMaiTa Mae MaiTa" )) 70 ))
adhyeñyate ca ya imaà
dharmyaà saàvädam ävayoù
jïäna-yajïena tenäham
iñöaù syäm iti me matiù
adhyeñyate—will study; ca—also; yaù—he; imam—this; dharmyaà—sacred;
saàvädam—conversation; ävayoù—of ours; jïäna—knowledge; yajïena—by
sacrifice; tena—by him; aham—I; iñöaù—worshiped; syäm—shall be; iti—thus;
me—My; matiù—opinion.
TRANSLATION
And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me by
his intelligence.
TEXT 71
é[ÖavaNaNaSaUYaê é*<auYaadiPa Yaae Nar" )
Saae_iPa Mau¢-" éu>aamçaek-aNPa[aPanuYaaTPau<Yak-MaR<aaMa( )) 71 ))
çraddhävän anasüyaç ca
çåëuyäd api yo naraù
so 'pi muktaù çubhäû lokän
präpnuyät puëya-karmaëäm


--- Page 81 ---
81
sraddhävan—faithful; anasüyaù ca—and not envious; çåëuyät—does hear;
api—certainly; yaù—who; naraù—man; saù api—he also; muktaù—being
liberated; 
çubhän—auspicious; 
lokän—planets; 
präpnuyät—attains;
puëya-karmaëäm—of the past.
TRANSLATION
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful
reaction and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.
PURPORT
In the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the Gétä's
being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In other words,
Bhagavad-gétä is for the devotees only, but it so happens that sometimes a
devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that class all the students are
not expected to be devotees. Why do such persons hold open class? It is
explained here that although everyone is not a devotee, still there are many
men who are not envious of Kåñëa. They have faith in Him as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If such persons hear from a bona fide devotee about
the Lord, the result is that they become at once free from all sinful reactions
and after that attain to the planetary system where all righteous persons are
situated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gétä, even a person who does
not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteous activities. Thus a
pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance to become free from all sinful
reactions and to become a devotee of the Lord.
Generally those who are free from sinful reaction are righteous. Such
persons very easily take to Kåñëa consciousness. The word puëya-karmaëäm is
very significant here. This refers to the performance of great sacrifice. Those
who are righteous in performing devotional service but who are not pure can
attain the planetary system of the polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva


--- Page 82 ---
82
Mahäräja is presiding. He is a great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special
planet which is called the polestar.
TEXT 72
k-iÀdeTaC^]uTa& PaaQaR TvYaEk-aGa]e<a ceTaSaa )
k-iÀdjaNaSaMMaaeh" Pa[<aíSTae DaNaÅYa )) 72 ))
kaccid etac chrutaà pärtha
tvayaikägreëa cetasä
kaccid ajïäna-sammohaù
praëañöas te dhanaïjaya
kaccit—whether; etat—this; çrutam—heard; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
tvayä—by you; ekägreëa—with full attention; cetasä—by the mind;
kaccit—whether; 
ajïäna—ignorant; 
saàmohaù—illusion;
praëañöaù—dispelled; te—of you; dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of wealth
(Arjuna).
TRANSLATION
O conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with your
mind? And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?
PURPORT
The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was His
duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole Bhagavad-gétä
in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to re-explain any point, or
the whole Bhagavad-gétä if so required. Actually, anyone who hears
Bhagavad-gétä from a bona fide spiritual master like Kåñëa or His representative
will find that all his ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gétä is not an ordinary


--- Page 83 ---
83
book written by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachings
from Kåñëa or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure to become a
liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.
TEXT 73
AJauRNa ovac )
Naíae Maaeh" SMa*iTalR/BDaa TvTPa[SaadaNMaYaaCYauTa )
iSQaTaae_iSMa GaTaSaNdeh" k-irZYae vcNa& Tav )) 73 ))
arjuna uväca
nañöo mohaù småtir labdhä
tvat prasädän mayäcyuta
sthito 'smi gata-sandehaù
kariñye vacanaà tava
arjunaù 
uväca—Arjuna 
said; 
nañöaù—dispelled; 
mohaù—illusion;
småtiù—memory; labdhä—regained; tvat-prasädät—by Your mercy; mayä—by
me; acyuta—O infallible Kåñëa; sthitaù—situated; asmi—I am; gata—removed;
sandehaù—all doubts; kariñye—I shall execute; vacanam—order; tava—Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, My dear Kåñëa, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I have
regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and free from doubt
and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.
PURPORT
The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna, is that


--- Page 84 ---
84
he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He is meant for
self-discipline. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says that the actual position of the
living entity is that of eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. Forgetting this
principle, the living entity becomes conditioned by material nature, but in
serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes the liberated servant of God. The living
entity's constitutional position is to be servitor; he either has to serve the
illusory mäyä or the Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his
normal condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy, then
certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is serving in this
material world. He is bound by his lust and desires, yet he thinks of himself as
the master of the world. This is called illusion. When a person is liberated, his
illusion is over, and he voluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act
according to His desires. The last illusion, the last snare of mäyä to trap the
living entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinks that he
is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is so unintelligent that he does not
think that if he were God, then how could he be in doubt? That he does not
consider. So that is the last snare of illusion. Actually to become free from the
illusory energy is to understand Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and agree to act according to His order. The word mohaù is very important in
this verse. Mohaù refers to that which is opposed to knowledge. Actually real
knowledge is the understanding that every living being is eternally servitor of
the Lord, but instead of thinking oneself in that position, the living entity
thinks that he is not servant, that he is the master of this material world, for he
wants to lord it over the material nature. That is his illusion. This illusion can
be overcome by the mercy of the Lord or by the mercy of a pure devotee. When
that illusion is over, one agrees to act in Kåñëa consciousness.
Kåñëa consciousness is acting according to Kåñëa's order. A conditioned
soul illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that the
Supreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the proprietor
of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon His devotees; He is
the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclined to His devotee. He is the


--- Page 85 ---
85
controller of this material nature and of all living entities. He is also the
controller of inexhaustible time, and He is full of all opulences and all
potencies. The Supreme Personality of Godhead can even give Himself to the
devotee. One who does not know Him is under the spell of illusion; he does not
become a devotee, but a servitor of mäyä. Arjuna, however, after hearing
Bhagavad-gétä from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all
illusion. He could understand that Kåñëa was not only his friend, but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he understood Kåñëa factually. So to
study Bhagavad-gétä is to understand Kåñëa factually. When a person is in full
knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Kåñëa. When Arjuna understood that it
was Kåñëa's plan to reduce the unnecessary increase of population, he agreed to
fight according to Kåñëa's desire. He again took up his weapons—his arrows
and bow—to fight under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 74
SaÅYa ovac )
wTYah& vaSaudevSYa PaaQaRSYa c MahaTMaNa" )
Sa&vadiMaMaMaé[aEzMad(>auTa& raeMahzR<aMa( )) 74 ))
saïjaya uväca
ity ahaà väsudevasya
pärthasya ca mahätmanaù
saàvädam imam açrauñam
adbhutaà roma-harñaëam
saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; iti—thus; aham—I; väsudevasya—of Kåñëa;
pärthasya—of 
Arjuna; 
ca—also; 
mahätmanaù—two 
great 
souls;
saàvädam—discussing; imam—this; açrauñam—heard; adbhutam—wonder;
romaharñaëam—hair standing on end.


--- Page 86 ---
86
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kåñëa
and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.
PURPORT
In the beginning of Bhagavad-gétä, Dhåtaräñöra inquired from his secretary
Saïjaya, "What happened in the Battlefield of Kurukñetra?" The entire study
was related to the heart of Saïjaya by the grace of his spiritual master, Vyäsa.
He thus explained the theme of the battlefield. The conversation was
wonderful because such an important conversation between two great souls
never took place before and would not take place again. It is wonderful because
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is speaking about Himself and His
energies to the living entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow
in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Kåñëa, then our life will be happy and
successful. Saïjaya realized this, and as he began to understand it, he related
the conversation to Dhåtaräñöra. Now it is concluded that wherever there is
Kåñëa and Arjuna, there is victory.
TEXT 75
VYaaSaPa[SaadaC^]uTavaNaeTad(GauùMah& ParMa( )
YaaeGa& YaaeGaeìraTk*-Z<aaTSaa+aaTk-QaYaTa" SvYaMa( )) 75 ))
vyäsa-prasädäc chrutavän
etad guhyam ahaà param
yogaà yogeçvarät kåñëät
säkñät kathayataù svayam
vyäsa-prasädät—by the mercy of Vyäsadeva; çrutavän—heard; etat—this;


--- Page 87 ---
87
guhyam—confidential; aham—I; param—the supreme; yogam—mysticism;
yogeçvarät—from the master of all mysticism; kåñëät—from Kåñëa;
säkñät—directly; kathayataù—speaking; svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of Vyäsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly
from the master of all mysticism, Kåñëa, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.
PURPORT
Vyäsa was the spiritual master of Saïjaya, and Saïjaya admits that it was by
his mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
means that one has to understand Kåñëa not directly but through the medium
of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is the transparent medium,
although it is true that the experience is direct. This is the mystery of the
disciplic succession. When the spiritual master is bona fide, then one can hear
Bhagavad-gétä directly, as Arjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogés all
over the world, but Kåñëa is the master of all yoga systems. Kåñëa's instruction
is explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gétä—surrender unto Krñëa. One who does so
is the topmost yogé. This is confirmed in the last verse of the Sixth Chapter.
Yoginäm api sarveñäm.
Närada is the direct disciple of Kåñëa and the spiritual master of Vyäsa.
Therefore Vyäsa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in the disciplic
succession, and Saïjaya is the direct disciple of Vyäsa. Therefore by the grace
of Vyäsa, his senses were purified, and he could see and hear Kåñëa directly.
One who directly hears Kåñëa can understand this confidential knowledge. If
one does not come to the disciplic succession, he cannot hear Kåñëa; therefore
his knowledge is always imperfect, at least as far as understanding
Bhagavad-gétä is concerned.
In Bhagavad-gétä, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga and


--- Page 88 ---
88
bhakti-yoga, are explained. Kåñëa is the master of all such mysticism. It is to be
understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to understand
Kåñëa directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyäsa, Saïjaya was also able to hear
Kåñëa directly. Actually there is no difference in hearing directly from Kåñëa
or hearing directly from Kåñëa via a bona fide spiritual master like Vyäsa. The
spiritual master is the representative of Vyäsadeva also. According to the Vedic
system, on the birthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the
ceremony called Vyäsa-püjä.
TEXT 76
raJaNSa&SMa*TYa Sa&SMa*TYa Sa&vadiMaMaMad(>auTaMa( )
ke-XavaJauRNaYaae" Pau<Ya& ôZYaaiMa c MauhuMauRhu" )) 76 ))
räjan saàsmåtya saàsmåtya
saàvädam imam adbhutam
keçavärjunayoù puëyaà
håñyämi ca muhur muhuù
räjan—O 
King; 
saàsmåtya—remembering; 
saàsmåtya—remembering;
saàvädam—message; 
imam—this; 
adbhutam—wonderful; 
keçava—Lord
Kåñëa; arjunayoù—and Arjuna; puëyam—pious; håñyämi—taking pleasure;
ca—also; muhuù muhuù—always, repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Kåñëa and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.
PURPORT
The understanding of Bhagavad-gétä is so transcendental that anyone who


--- Page 89 ---
89
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Kåñëa becomes righteous,
and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental position of spiritual
life. In other words, one who hears the Gétä from the right source, directly from
Kåñëa, attains full Kåñëa consciousness. The result of Kåñëa consciousness is
that one becomes increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not
only for some time, but at every moment.
TEXT 77
TaÀ Sa&SMa*TYa Sa&SMa*TYa æPaMaTYad(>auTa& hre" )
ivSMaYaae Mae MahaNraJaNôZYaaiMa c PauNa" PauNa" )) 77 ))
tac ca saàsmåtya saàsmåtya
rüpam atyadbhutaà hareù
vismayo me mahän räjan
håñyämi ca punaù punaù
tat—that; ca—also; saàsmåtya—remembering; saàsmåtya—remembering;
rüpam—form; ati—great; adbhutam—wonderful; hareù—of Lord Kåñëa;
vismayaù—wonder; 
me—my; 
mahän—great; 
räjan—O 
King,
håñyämi—enjoying; ca—also; punaù punaù—repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Kåñëa, I am struck
with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again.
PURPORT
It appears that Saïjaya also, by the grace of Vyäsa, could see the universal
form of Kåñëa exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said that Lord Kåñëa never
exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited to Arjuna only, yet some great


--- Page 90 ---
90
devotees could also see the universal form of Kåñëa when it was shown to
Arjuna, and Vyäsa was one of them. He is one of the great devotees of the
Lord, and he is considered to be a powerful incarnation of Kåñëa. Vyäsa
disclosed this to his disciple, Saïjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of
Kåñëa exhibited to Arjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.


--- Page 91 ---
91


--- Page 92 ---
92
TEXT 78
a}a YaaeGaeìr" k*-Z<aae Ya}a PaaQaaeR DaNauDaRr" )
Ta}a é[qivRJaYaae >aUiTaDa]uRva NaqiTaMaRiTaMaRMa )) 78 ))
yatra yogeçvaraù kåñëo
yatra pärtho dhanur-dharaù
tatra çrér vijayo bhütir
dhruvä nétir matir mama
yatra—where; yogeçvaraù—the master of mysticism; kåñëaù—Lord Krñna;
yatra—where; pärthaù—the son of Påthä; dhanur-dharaù—the carrier of the
bow 
and 
arrow; 
tatra—there; 
çréù—opulence; 
vijayaù—victory;
bhütiù—exceptional 
power; 
dhruvä—certainly; 
nétiù—morality; 
matiù
mama—is my opinion.
TRANSLATION
Wherever there is Kåñëa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is
Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory,
extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gétä began with an inquiry of Dhåtaräñöra. He was hopeful of
the victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhéñma, Droëa and Karëa.
He was hopeful that the victory would be on his side. But, after describing the
scene in the battlefield, Saïjaya told the King, "You are thinking of victory,
but my opinion is that where Kåñëa and Arjuna are present, there will be all
good fortune." He directly confirmed that Dhåtaräñöra could not expect victory
for his side. Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna because Kåñëa was there.
Kåñëa's acceptance of the post of charioteer for Arjuna was an exhibition of


--- Page 93 ---
93
another opulence. Kåñëa is full of all opulences, and renunciation is one of
them. There are many instances of such renunciation, for Kåñëa is also the
master of renunciation.
The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhiñöhira. Arjuna was
fighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhiñöhira. Because Kåñëa and Arjuna
were on the side of Yudhiñöhira, Yudhiñöhira's victory was certain. The battle
was to decide who would rule the world, and Saïjaya predicted that the power
would be transferred to Yudhiñöhira. It is also predicted here that Yudhiñöhira,
after gaining victory in this battle, would flourish more and more because he
was not only righteous and pious, but he was a strict moralist. He never spoke a
lie during his life.
There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gétä to be a
discussion of topics between two friends in a battlefield. But such a book
cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Kåñëa incited Arjuna to fight,
which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearly stated:
Bhagavad-gétä is the supreme instruction in morality. The supreme instruction
of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in the thirty-fourth verse: manmanä
bhava mad-bhaktaù. One must become a devotee of Kåñëa, and the essence of
all religion is to surrender unto Kåñëa, as stated, Sarva-dharmän. The
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä constitute the supreme process of religion and of
morality. All other processes may be purifying and may lead to this process, but
the last instruction of the Gétä is the last word in all morality and religion:
surrender unto Kåñëa. This is the verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.
From Bhagavad-gétä we can understand that to realize oneself by
philosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but to fully
surrender unto Kåñëa is the highest perfection. This is the essence of the
teachings of Bhagavad-gétä. The path of regulative principles according to the
orders of social life and according to the different courses of religion may be a
confidential path of knowledge in as far as the rituals of religion are
confidential, but one is still involved with meditation and cultivation of


--- Page 94 ---
94
knowledge. Surrender unto Kåñëa in devotional service in full Kåñëa
consciousness is the most confidential instruction and is the essence of the
Eighteenth Chapter.
Another feature of Bhagavad-gétä is that the actual truth is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Absolute Truth is realized in three
features—impersonal Brahman, localized Paramätmä, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth
means perfect knowledge of Kåñëa. If one understands Kåñëa, then all the
departments of knowledge are part and parcel of that understanding. Kåñëa is
transcendental, for He is always situated in His eternal internal potency. The
living entities are manifested and are divided into two classes, eternally
conditioned and eternally liberated. Such living entities are innumerable, and
they are considered fundamental parts of Kåñëa. Material energy is manifested
into twenty-four divisions. The creation is effected by eternal time, and it is
created and dissolved by external energy. This manifestation of the cosmic
world repeatedly becomes visible and invisible.
In Bhagavad-gétä five principal subject matters have been discussed: the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the living entities, eternal
time and all kinds of activities. All of these are dependant on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. All conceptions of the Absolute Truth,
namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramätmä, or any other
transcendental conception, exist within the category of understanding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although superficially the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the living entity, material nature and time appear to
be different, nothing is different from the Supreme. But the Supreme is always
different from everything. Lord Caitanya's philosophy is that of "inconceivably
one and different." This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge of
the Absolute Truth.
The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is just like an
atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. The conditioned living entity, however,


--- Page 95 ---
95
is the marginal energy of the Lord; he tends to be in contact with both the
material energy and the spiritual energy. In other words, the living entity is
situated between the two energies of the Lord, and because he belongs to the
superior energy of the Lord, he has a particle of independence. By proper use of
that independence he comes under the direct order of Kåñëa. Thus he attains
his normal condition in the pleasure-giving potency.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of its Conclusions—the Perfection of
Renunciation.


--- Page 96 ---
96
Endnotes
1 (Popup - Popup)
Vedänta Sütra 1.1.2
oà janmädy asya yataù
SYNONYMS
  janma-adi—creation, sustenance and destruction; asya—of the manifested
universe; yataù—from whom.
That Brahman (the Supreme Spirit) is He from whom the creation,
sustenance and destruction of the manifested universe arise.
2 (Popup - Popup)
Vedänta-sütra 4.1.12
Sütra 12
äpräyaëät taträpi hi dåñöam
 
ä—until; 
präyaëät—liberation; 
tatra—there; 
api—even; 
hi—indeed;
dåñöam—seen.
 Until liberation. Even there it is seen.
