--- Page 1 ---
1
2. Contents of the Gétä Summarized
TEXT 1
SaÅYa ovac
Ta& TaQaa k*-PaYaaivíMaé[uPaU<aaRku-le/+a<aMa( )
ivzqdNTaiMad& vaKYaMauvac MaDauSaUdNa" )) 1 ))
saïjaya uväca
taà tathä kåpayäviñöam
açru-pürëäkulekñaëam
viñédantam idaà väkyam
uväca madhusüdanaù
saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; tam—unto Arjuna; tathä—thus; kåpayä—by
compassion; 
äviñöam—overwhelmed; 
açru-pürëa—full 
of 
tears;
äkula—depressed; 
ékñaëam—eyes; 
viñédantam—lamenting; 
idam—this;
väkyam—words; uväca—said; madhusüdanaù—the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his eyes
brimming with tears, Madhusüdana, Kåñëa, spoke the following words.
PURPORT
Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance of the


--- Page 2 ---
2
real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization. The word
"Madhusüdana" is significant in this verse. Lord Kåñëa killed the demon
Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Kåñëa to kill the demon of misunderstanding
that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty. No one knows where
compassion should be applied. Compassion for the dress of a drowning man is
senseless. A man fallen in the ocean of nescience cannot be saved simply by
rescuing his outward dress—the gross material body. One who does not know
this and laments for the outward dress is called a çüdra, or one who laments
unnecessarily. Arjuna was a kñatriya, and this conduct was not expected from
him. Lord Kåñëa, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man,
and for this purpose the Bhagavad-gétä was sung by Him. This chapter instructs
us in self-realization by an analytical study of the material body and the spirit
soul, as explained by the supreme authority, Lord Çré Kåñëa. This realization is
made possible by working with the fruitive being situated in the fixed
conception of the real self.
TEXT 2
é[q>aGavaNauvac
ku-TaSTva k-XMal/iMad& ivzMae SaMauPaiSQaTaMa( )
ANaaYaRJauíMaSvGYaRMak-IiTaRk-rMaJauRNa )) 2 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
kutas tvä kaçmalam idaà
viñame samupasthitam
anärya-juñöam asvargyam
akérti-karam arjuna
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;
kutaù—wherefrom; 
tvä—unto 
you; 
kaçmalam—dirtiness; 
idam—this
lamentation; 
viñame—this 
hour 
of 
crisis; 
samupasthitam—arrived;


--- Page 3 ---
3
anärya—persons who do not know the value of life; juñöam—practiced by;
asvargyam—that which does not lead to higher planets; akérti—infamy;
karam—the cause of; arjuna—O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Person [Bhagavän] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows the
progressive values of life. They do not lead to higher planets, but to infamy.
PURPORT
Kåñëa and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Kåñëa is referred to as "Bhagavän" throughout the Gétä. Bhagavän is the
ultimate in the Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of
understanding, namely Brahman or the impersonal all-pervasive spirit;
Paramätmä, or the localized aspect of the Supreme within the heart of all living
entities; and Bhagavän, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained
thus:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate.
"The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Such phases of the
Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramätmä, and Bhagavän." (Bhäg.
1.2.11) These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun's surface
and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is the preliminary
student. One who understands the sun's surface is further advanced. And one
who can enter into the sun planet is the highest. Ordinary students who are
satisfied by simply understanding the sunshine—its universal pervasiveness


--- Page 4 ---
4
and the glaring effulgence of its impersonal nature—may be compared to those
who can realize only the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student
who has advanced still further can know the sun disc, which is compared to
knowledge of the Paramätmä feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student
who can enter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realize
the personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, the bhaktas,
or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavän feature of the
Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists, although all students who
are engaged in the study of the Absolute Truth are engaged in the same subject
matter. The sunshine, the sun disc and the inner affairs of the sun planet
cannot be separated from one another, and yet the students of the three
different phases are not in the same category.
The Sanskrit word Bhagavän is explained by the great authority, Paräçara
Muni, the father of Vyäsadeva. The Supreme Personality who possesses all
riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation is
called Bhagavän. There are many persons who are very rich, very powerful,
very beautiful, very famous, very learned, and very much detached, but no one
can claim that he possesses all riches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Kåñëa
can claim this because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living
entity, including Brahmä, Lord Çiva, or Näräyaëa, can possess opulences as
fully as Kåñëa. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-saàhitä by Lord
Brahmä himself that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No
one is equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavän, known as
Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù sarua-käraëa-käraëam
"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavän, but Kåñëa
is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person, and His
body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval Lord Govinda


--- Page 5 ---
5
and the cause of all causes." (Brahma-saàhitä 5.1)
In the Bhägavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but Kåñëa is described as the original Personality of
Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and Personalities of Godhead
expand:
ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam
indräri-vyäkulaà lokaà måòayanti yuge yuge
"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are either
plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of the Supreme
Godhead, but Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself." (Bhäg.
1.3.28)
Therefore, Kåñëa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonal Brahman.
In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna's
lamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and therefore Kåñëa
expressed His surprise with the word kutas, "wherefrom." Such unmanly
sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to the civilized class
of men known as Äryans. The word äryan is applicable to persons who know
the value of life and have a civilization based on spiritual realization. Persons
who are led by the material conception of life do not know that the aim of life
is realization of the Absolute Truth, Viñëu, or Bhagavän, and they are
captivated by the external features of the material world, and therefore they do
not know what liberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from
material bondage are called non-Äryans. Although Arjuna was a kñatriya, he
was deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This act of
cowardice is described as befitting the non-Äryans. Such deviation from duty
does not help one in the progress of spiritual life, nor does it even give one the
opportunity to become famous in this world. Lord Kåñëa did not approve of the


--- Page 6 ---
6
so-called compassion of Arjuna for his kinsmen.
TEXT 3
(c)E-BYa& Maa SMa GaMa" PaaQaR NaETatvYYauPaPaÛTae )
+aud]& ôdYadaEbRLYa& TYa¤-aeitaï ParNTaPa )) 3 ))
klaibyaà mä sma gamaù pärtha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
kñudraà hådaya-daurbalyaà
tyaktvottiñöha parantapa
klaibyam—impotence; mä—do not; sma—take it; gamaù—go in; pärtha—O
son of Påthä; na—never; etat—like this; tvayi—unto you; upapadyate—is
befitting; 
kñudram—very 
little; 
hådaya—heart; 
daurbalyam—weakness;
tyaktvä—giving up; uttiñöha—get up; parantapa—O chastiser of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
O son of Påthä, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become
you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.
PURPORT
Arjuna was addressed as the "son of Påthä," who happened to be the sister of
Kåñëa's father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a blood relationship with
Kåñëa. If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, he is a kñatriya in name only,
and if the son of a brähmaëa acts impiously, he is a brähmaëa in name only.
Such kñatriyas and brähmaëas are unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore,
Kåñëa did not want Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a kñatriya. Arjuna
was the most intimate friend of Kåñëa, and Kåñëa was directly guiding him on
the chariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the battle, he


--- Page 7 ---
7
would be committing an infamous act; therefore Kåñëa said that such an
attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjuna might argue that he
would give up the battle on the grounds of his magnanimous attitude for the
most respectable Bhéñma and his relatives, but Kåñëa considered that sort of
magnanimity not approved by authority. Therefore, such magnanimity or
so-called nonviolence should be given up by persons like Arjuna under the
direct guidance of Kåñëa.
TEXT 4
AJauRNa ovac
k-Qa& >aqZMaMah& Sa&:Yae d]ae<a& c MaDauSaUdNa )
wzui>a" Pa[iTaYaaeTSYaaiMa PaUJaahaRvirSaUdNa )) 4 ))
arjuna uväca
kathaà bhéñmam ahaà saìkhye
droëaà ca madhusüdana
iñubhiù pratiyotsyämi
püjärhäv arisüdana
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; katham—how; bhéñmam—unto Bhéñma; aham—I;
saìkhye—in the fight; droëam—unto Droëa; ca—also, madhusüdana—O
killer of Madhu; iñubhiù—with arrows; pratiyotsyämi—shall counterattack;
püjä-arhau—those who are worshipable; arisüdana—O killer of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Kåñëa], how can I counterattack with
arrows in battle men like Bhéñma and Droëa, who are worthy of my worship?
PURPORT


--- Page 8 ---
8
Respectable superiors like Bhéñma the grandfather and Droëäcärya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not be
counterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to be offered
even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh in behavior, they should
not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possible for Arjuna to counterattack
them? Would Kåñëa ever attack His own grandfather, Ugrasena, or His
teacher, Sändépani Muni? These were some of the arguments by Arjuna to
Kåñëa.
TEXT 5
GauæNahTva ih MahaNau>aavaNa(
 é[eYaae >aae¢u-& >aE+YaMaPaqh l/aeke- )
hTvaQaRk-aMaa&STau GauæiNahEv
 >auÅqYa >aaeGaaNåiDarPa[idGDaaNa( )) 5 ))
gurün ahatvä hi mahänubhävän
çreyo bhoktuà bhaikñyam apéha loke
hatvärtha-kämäàs tu gurün ihaiva
bhuïjéya bhogän rudhira-pradigdhän
gurün—the 
superiors; 
ahatvä—by 
killing; 
hi—certainly;
mahä-anubhävän—great souls; çreyaù—it is better; bhoktum—to enjoy life;
bhaikñyam—begging; api—even; iha—in this life; loke—in this world;
hatvä—killing; artha—gain; kämän—so desiring; tu—but; gurün—superiors;
iha—in this world; eva—certainly; bhuïjéya—has to enjoy; bhogän—enjoyable
things; rudhira—blood; pradigdhän—tainted with.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 9 ---
9
It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives
of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they are avaricious, they are
nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our spoils will be tainted with blood.
PURPORT
According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned. Bhéñma
and Droëa were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because of his financial
assistance, although they should not have accepted such a position simply on
financial considerations. Under the circumstances, they have lost the
respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks that nevertheless they remain his
superiors, and therefore to enjoy material profits after killing them would mean
to enjoy spoils tainted with blood.
TEXT 6
Na cETaiÜÚ" k-Taràae GarqYaae
 YaÜa JaYaeMa Yaid va Naae JaYaeYau" )
YaaNaev hTva Na iJaJaqivzaMa‚
 STae_viSQaTaa" Pa[Mau%e DaaTaRraí\a" )) 6 ))
na caitad vidmaù kataran no garéyo
yad vä jayema yadi vä no jayeyuù
yän eva hatvä na jijéviñämas
te 'vasthitäù pramukhe dhärtaräñöräù
na—nor; ca—also; etat—this; vidmaù—do know; katarat—which; naù—us;
garéyaù—better; yat—what; vä—either; jayema—conquer us; yadi—if; vä—or;
naù—us; jayeyuù—conquer; yän—those; eva—certainly; hatvä—by killing;
na—never; jijéviñämaù—want to live; te—all of them; avasthitäù—are situated;


--- Page 10 ---
10
pramukhe—in the front; dhärtaräñöräù—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra.
TRANSLATION
Nor do we know which is better—conquering them or being conquered by
them. The sons of Dhåtaräñöra, whom if we killed we should not care to live, are
now standing before us on this battlefield.
PURPORT
Arjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
violence, although fighting is the duty of the kñatriyas, or whether he should
refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy, begging would be
his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certainty of victory, because
either side might emerge victorious. Even if victory awaited them (and their
cause was justified), still, if the sons of Dhåtaräñöra died in battle, it would be
very difficult to live in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be
another kind of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
prove that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but that he was also
highly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses. His
desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royal household, is
another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, as these qualities, combined
with his faith in the words of instruction of Çré Kåñëa (his spiritual master),
indicate. It is concluded that Arjuna was quite fit for liberation. Unless the
senses are controlled, there is no chance of elevation to the platform of
knowledge, and without knowledge and devotion there is no chance of
liberation. Arjuna was competent in all these attributes, over and above his
enormous attributes in his material relationships.
TEXT 7
k-aPaR<YadaezaePahTaSv>aav"


--- Page 11 ---
11
 Pa*C^aiMa Tva& DaMaRSaMMaU!ceTaa" )
YaC^\eYa" SYaaiàiêTa& b]Uih TaNMae
 iXaZYaSTae_h& XaaiDa Maa& Tva& Pa[PaàMa( )) 7 ))
kärpaëya-doñopahata-svabhävaù
påcchämi tväà dharma-sammüòha-cetäù
yac chreyaù syän niçcitaà brühi tan me
çiñyas te 'haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam
kärpaëya—miserly; 
doña—weakness; 
upahata—being 
inflicted 
by;
svabhävaù—characteristics; 
påcchämi—I 
am 
asking; 
tväm—unto 
You;
dharma—religion; saàmüòha—bewildered; cetäù—in heart; yat—what;
çreyaù—all-good; syät—may be; niçcitam—confidently; brühi—tell; tat—that;
me—unto me; çiñyaù—disciple; te—Your; aham—I am; çädhi—just instruct;
mäm—me; tväm—unto You; prapannam—surrendered.
TRANSLATION
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is best for
me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct
me.
PURPORT
By nature's own way the complete system of material activities is a source of
perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity, and therefore it
behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual master who can give one proper
guidance for executing the purpose of life. All Vedic literatures advise us to
approach a bona fide spiritual master to get free from the perplexities of life
which happen without our desire. They are like a forest fire that somehow
blazes without being set by anyone. Similarly, the world situation is such that


--- Page 12 ---
12
perplexities of life automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion.
No one wants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedic
wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of life and to
understand the science of the solution, one must approach a spiritual master
who is in the disciplic succession. A person with a bona fide spiritual master is
supposed to know everything. One should not, therefore, remain in material
perplexities but should approach a spiritual master. This is the purport of this
verse.
Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does not understand
the problems of life. In the Garga Upaniñad the perplexed man is described as
follows:
yo vä etad akñaraà gärgy aviditväsmäl lokät praiti sa kåpaëaù
[Båhad-äraëyaka Up. 3.8.10]
"He is a miserly man who does not solve the problems of life as a human and
who thus quits this world like the cats and dogs, without understanding the
science of self-realization." This human form of life is a most valuable asset for
the living entity who can ultilize it for solving the problems of life; therefore,
one who does not utilize this opportunity properly is a miser. On the other
hand, there is the brähmaëa, or he who is intelligent enough to utilize this body
to solve all the problems of life.
The kåpaëas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overly
affectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the material conception of life.
One is often attached to family life, namely to wife, children and other
members, on the basis of "skin disease." The kåpaëa thinks that he is able to
protect his family members from death; or the kåpaëa thinks that his family or
society can save him from the verge of death. Such family attachment can be
found even in the lower animals who take care of children also. Being
intelligent, Arjuna could understand that his affection for family members and
his wish to protect them from death were the causes ot his perplexities.


--- Page 13 ---
13
Although he could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, on
account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He is therefore
asking Lord Kåñëa, the supreme spiritual master, to make a definite solution.
He offers himself to Kåñëa as a disciple. He wants to stop friendly talks. Talks
between the master and the disciple are serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk
very seriously before the recognized spiritual master. Kåñëa is therefore the
original spiritual master of the science of Bhagavad-gétä, and Arjuna is the first
disciple for understanding the Gétä. How Arjuna understands the
Bhagavad-gétä is stated in the Gétä itself. And yet foolish mundane scholars
explain that one need not submit to Kåñëa as a person, but to "the unborn
within Kåñëa." There is no difference between Kåñëa's within and without.
And one who has no sense of this understanding is the greatest fool in trying
to understand Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 8
Na ih Pa[PaXYaaiMa MaMaaPaNauÛa‚
 ÛC^aek-MauC^aez<aiMaiNd]Yaa<aaMa( )
AvaPYa >aUMaavSaPaÒMa*Ö&
 raJYa& Saura<aaMaiPa caiDaPaTYaMa( )) 8 ))
na hi prapaçyämi mamäpanudyäd
yac chokam ucchoñaëam indriyäëäm
aväpya bhümäv asapatnam åddhaà
räjyaà suräëäm api cädhipatyam
na—do not; hi—certainly; prapaçyämi—I see; mama—my; apanudyät—they
can drive away; yat—that; çokam—lamentation; ucchoñaëam—drying up;
indriyäëäm—of the senses; aväpya—achieving; bhümau—on the earth;
asapatnam—without 
rival; 
åddham—prosperous; 
räjyam—kingdom;


--- Page 14 ---
14
suräëäm—of the demigods; api—even; ca—also; ädhipatyam—supremacy.
TRANSLATION
I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I
will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivalled kingdom on the earth
with sovereignty like that of the demigods in heaven.
PURPORT
Although Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears that he was
unable to solve his real problem without the help of the spiritual master, Lord
Çré Kåñëa. He could understand that his so-called knowledge was useless in
driving away his problems, which were drying up his whole existence; and it
was impossible for him to solve such perplexities without the help of a spiritual
master like Lord Kåñëa. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc.,
are all useless in solving the problems of life; help can only be given by a
spiritual master like Kåñëa. Therefore, the conclusion is that a spiritual master
who is one hundred percent Kåñëa conscious is the bona fide spiritual master,
for he can solve the problems of life. Lord Caitanya said that one who is master
in the science of Kåñëa consciousness, regardless of his social position, is the
real spiritual master.
kibävipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei 'guru' haya.
(Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 8.127)
"It does not matter whether a person is a vipra [learned scholar in Vedic
wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renounced order of life—if he
is master in the science of Kåñëa, he is the perfect and bona fide spiritual
master." So without being a master in the science of Kåñëa consciousness, no


--- Page 15 ---
15
one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also said in Vedic literatures:
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd vaiñëavaù çvapaco guruù
"A scholarly brähmaëa, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is unfit to
become a spiritual master without being a Vaiñëava, or expert in the science of
Kåñëa consciousness. But a person born in a family of a lower caste can become
a spiritual master if he is a Vaiñëava, or Kåñëa conscious."
The problems of material existence—birth, old age, disease and
death—cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economic
development. In many parts of the world there are states which are replete
with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth, and economically developed,
yet the problems of material existence are still present. They are seeking peace
in different ways, but they ean achieve real happiness only if they consult
Kåñëa, or the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam—which constitute the
science of Kåñëa—or the bona fide representative of Kåñëa, the man in Kåñëa
consciousness.
If economic development and material comforts could drive away one's
lamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties, then
Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivalled kingdom on earth or
supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets would not be able
to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore, refuge in Kåñëa
consciousness, and that is the right path for peace and harmony. Economic
development or supremacy over the world can be finished at any moment by
the cataclysms of material nature. Even elevation into a higher planetary
situation, as men are now seeking a place on the moon planet, can also be
finished at one stroke. The Bhagavad-gétä confirms this: kñéëe puëye
martyalokaà viçanti "When the results of pious activities are finished, one falls
down again from the peak of happiness to the lowest status of life." Many
politicians of the world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls only


--- Page 16 ---
16
constitute more causes for lamentation.
Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have to take
shelter of Kåñëa, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna asked Kåñëa to solve his
problem definitely, and that is the way of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 9
SaÅYa ovac
WvMau¤-a ôzqke-Xa& Gau@ake-Xa" ParNTaPa" )
Na YaaeTSYa wiTa GaaeivNdMau¤-a TaUZ<aq& b>aUv h )) 9 ))
saïjaya uväca
evam uktvä håñékeçaà
guòäkeçaù parantapaù
na yotsya iti govindam
uktvä tüñëéà babhüva ha
saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; evam—thus; uktvä—speaking; håñékeçam—unto
Kåñëa, the master of the senses; guòäkeçaù—Arjuna, the master at curbing
ignorance; parantapaù—the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye—I shall not
fight; iti—thus; govindam—unto Kåñëa, the giver of pleasure; uktvä—saying;
tüñëém—silent; babhüva—became; ha—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told Kåñëa,
"Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.
PURPORT
Dhåtaräñöra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not


--- Page 17 ---
17
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the begging
profession. But Saïjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjuna was
competent to kill his enemies (parantapaù). Although Arjuna was for the time
being overwhelmed with false grief due to family affection, he surrendered
unto Kåñëa, the supreme spiritual master, as a disciple. This indicated that he
would soon be free from the false lamentation resulting from family affection
and would be enlightened with perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Kåñëa
consciousness, and would then surely fight. Thus Dhåtaräñöra's joy would be
frustrated, since Arjuna would be enlightened. by Kåñëa and would fight to the
end.
TEXT 10
TaMauvac ôzqke-Xa" Pa[hSaiàv >aarTa
SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae ivzqdNTaiMad& vc" )) 10 ))
tam uväca håñékeçaù
prahasann iva bhärata
senayor ubhayor madhye
viñédantam idaà vacaù
tam—unto him; uväca—said; håñékeçaù—the master of the senses, Kåñëa;
prahasan—smiling; iva—like that; bhärata—O Dhåtaräñöra, descendant of
Bharata; senayoù—of the armies; ubhayoù—of both parties; madhye—between;
viñédantam—unto the lamenting one; idam—the following; vacaù—words.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, at that time Kåñëa, smiling, in the midst of both
the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna.


--- Page 18 ---
18
PURPORT
The talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Håñékeça and
the Guòäkeça. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but one of
them voluntarily became a student of the other. Kåñëa was smiling because a
friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He is always in the
superior position as the master of everyone, and yet the Lord accepts one who
wishes to be a friend, a son, a lover or a devotee, or who wants Him in such a
role. But when He was accepted as the master, He at once assumed the role and
talked with the disciple like the master—with gravity, as it is required. It
appears that the talk between the master and the disciple was openly
exchanged in the presence of both armies so that all were benefitted. So the
talks of Bhagavad-gétä are not for any particular person, society, or community,
but they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled to hear them.


--- Page 19 ---
19


--- Page 20 ---
20
TEXT 11
é[q>aGavaNauvac
AXaaeCYaaNaNvXaaecSTv& Pa[javada&ê >aazSae )
GaTaaSaUNaGaTaaSaU&ê NaaNauXaaeciNTa Pai<@Taa" )) 11 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
açocyän anvaçocas tvaà
prajïä-vädäàç ca bhäñase
gatäsün agatäsüàç ca
nänuçocanti paëòitäù
çré bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; açocyän—that
which is not worthy of lamentation; anvaçocaù—you are lamenting;
tvam—you; 
prajïä-vädäù—learned 
talks; 
ca—also; 
bhäñase—speaking;
gata—lost; asün—life; agata—not past; asün—life; ca—also; na—never;
anuçocanti—lament; paëòitäù—the learned.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for
what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living
nor the dead.
PURPORT
The Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the student,
calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, you are talking like a learned man,
but you do not know that one who is learned—one who knows what is body
and what is soul—does not lament for any stage of the body, neither in the
living nor in the dead condition. As it will be explained in later chapters, it will
be clear that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller of


--- Page 21 ---
21
both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given more importance
than politics or sociology, but he did not know that knowledge of matter, soul
and the Supreme is even more important than religious formularies. And,
because he was lacking in that knowledge, he should not have posed himself as
a very learned man. As he did not happen to be a very learned man, he was
consequently lamenting for something which was unworthy of lamentation.
The body is born and is destined to be vanquished today or tomorrow;
therefore the body is not as important as the soul. One who knows this is
actually learned, and for him there is no cause for lamentation, regardless of
the condition of the material body.
TEXT 12
NaTvevah& JaaTau NaaSa& Na Tv& NaeMae JaNaaiDaPaa" )
Na cEv Na>aivZYaaMa" SaveR vYaMaTa" ParMa( )) 12 ))
na tv evähaà jätu näsaà
na tvaà neme janädhipäù
na caiva na bhaviñyämaù
sarve vayam ataù param
na—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jätu—become; na—never;
äsam—existed; na—it is not so; tvam—yourself; na—not; ime—all these;
janädhipäù—kings; na—never; ca—also; eva—certainly; na—not like that;
bhaviñyämaù—shall exist; sarve—all of us; vayam—we; ataù param—hereafter.
TRANSLATION
Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings;
nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.


--- Page 22 ---
22
PURPORT
In the Vedas, in the Kaöha Upaniñad as well as in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad,
it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the maintainer of
innumerable living entities, in terms of their different situations according to
individual work and reaction of work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is
also, by His plenary portions, alive in the heart of every living entity. Only
saintly persons who can see, within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can
actually attain to perfect and eternal peace.
nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän
tam ätmasthaà ye 'nupaçyanti dhéräs
teñäà çäntiù çäçvaté netareñäm.
(Kaöha 2.2.13)
The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the world
who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poor fund of
knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, and all the kings
who are assembled on the battlefield, are eternally individual beings and that
the Lord is eternally the maintainer of the individual living entities both in
their conditioned as well as in their liberated situations. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the
Lord's eternal associate, and all the kings assembled there are individual,
eternal persons. It is not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and
it is not that they will not remain eternal persons. Their individuality existed
in the past, and their individuality will continue in the future without
interruption. Therefore, there is no cause for lamentation for anyone.
The Mäyävädé theory that after liberation the individual soul, separated by
the covering of mäyä or illusion, will merge into the impersonal Brahman and
lose its individual existence is not supported herein by Lord Kåñëa, the


--- Page 23 ---
23
supreme authority. Nor is the theory that we only think of individuality in the
conditioned state supported herein. Kåñëa clearly says herein that in the future
also the individuality of the Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the
Upaniñads, will continue eternally. This statement of Kåñëa is authoritative
because Kåñëa cannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact, then
Kåñëa would not have stressed it so much—even for the future. The Mäyävädé
may argue that the individuality spoken of by Kåñëa is not spiritual, but
material. Even accepting the argument that the individuality is material, then
how can one distinguish Kåñëa's individuality? Kåñëa affirms His individuality
in the past and confirms His individuality in the future also. He has confirmed
His individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared to
be subordinate to Him. Kåñëa has maintained spiritual individuality all along;
if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individual consciousness,
then His Bhagavad-gétä has no value as authoritative scripture. A common man
with all the four defects of human frailty is unable to teach that which is worth
hearing. The Gétä is above such literature. No mundane book compares with
the Bhagavad-gétä. When one accepts Kåñëa as an ordinary man, the Gétä loses
all importance. The Mäyävädé argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse
is conventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this verse such a
bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning the bodily
conception of the living entities, how was it possible for Kåñëa to place a
conventional proposition on the body again? Therefore, individuality is
maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed by great äcäryas like Çré
Rämänuja and others. It is clearly mentioned in many places in the Gétä that
this spiritual individuality is understood by those who are devotees of the Lord.
Those who are envious of Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have
no bona fide access to the great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the
teachings of the Géta is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. One
cannot have a taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly, the
mysticism of the Bhagavad-gétä can be understood only by devotees, and no one
else can taste it, as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter of the book. Nor can the


--- Page 24 ---
24
Gétä be touched by persons who envy the very existence of the Lord.
Therefore, the Mäyävädé explanation of the Gétä is a most misleading
presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya has forbidden us to read
commentations made by the Mäyävädés and warns that one who takes to such
an understanding of the Mäyävädé philosophy loses all power to understand the
real mystery of the Gétä. If individuality refers to the empirical universe, then
there is no need of teaching by the Lord. The plurality of the individual soul
and of the Lord is an eternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above
mentioned.


--- Page 25 ---
25


--- Page 26 ---
26
TEXT 13
deihNaae_iSMaNYaQaa dehe k-aEMaar& YaaEvNa& Jara )


--- Page 27 ---
27
TaQaa dehaNTarPa[aiáDasrSTa}a Na MauùiTa )) 13 ))
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
dehinaù—of the embodied; asmin—in this; yathä—as; dehe—in the body;
kaumäram—boyhood; yauvanam—youth; jarä—old age; tathä—similarly;
dehäntara—transference of the body; präptiù—achievement; dhéraù—the
sober; tatra—thereupon; na—never; muhyati—deluded.
TRANSLATION
As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized
soul is not bewildered by such a change.
PURPORT
Since every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his body
every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as a youth, and
sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is there and does not undergo
any change. This individual soul finally changes the body at death and
transmigrates to another body; and since it is sure to have another body in the
next birth—either material or spiritual—there was no cause for lamentation
by Arjuna on account of death, neither for Bhéñma nor for Droëa, for whom he
was so much concerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies
from old to new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of body
account for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to one's work in life.
So Bhéñma and Droëa, being noble souls, were surely going to have either
spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life in heavenly bodies for superior


--- Page 28 ---
28
enjoyment of material existence. So, in either case, there was no cause of
lamentation.
Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul, and nature—both material and spiritual—is called a dhéra
or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change of bodies. The
Mäyävädé theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be entertained on the
ground that spirit soul cannot be cut into pieces as a fragmental portion. Such
cutting into different individual souls would make the Supreme cleavable or
changeable, against the principle of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable.
As confirmed in the Gétä, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist
eternally (sanätana) and are called kñara; that is, they have a tendency to fall
down into material nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and
even after liberation, the individual soul remains the same—fragmental. But
once liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge with the
Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be applied to the
Supersoul who is present in each and every individual body and is known as
the Paramätmä, who is different from the individual living entity. When the
sky is reflected in water, the reflections represent both the sun and the moon
and the stars also. The stars can be compared to the living entities and the sun
or the moon to the Supreme Lord. The individual fragmental spirit soul is
represented by Arjuna, and the Supreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead
Çré Kåñëa. They are not on the same level, as it will be apparent in the
beginning of the Fourth Chapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with Kåñëa,
and Kåñëa is not superior to Arjuna, then their relationship of instructor and
instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by the illusory
energy (mäyä), then there is no need of one being the instructor and the other
the instructed. Such instruction would be useless because, in the clutches of
mäyä, no one can be an authoritative instructor. Under the circumstances, it is
admitted that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, superior in position to the
living entity, Arjuna, who is a forgotten soul deluded by mäyä.


--- Page 29 ---
29
TEXT 14
Maa}aaSPaXaaRSTau k-aENTaeYa XaqTaaeZ<aSau%du"%da" )
AaGaMaaPaaiYaNaae_iNaTYaaSTaa&iSTaiTa+aSv >aarTa )) 14 ))
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
mäträ—sensuous; sparçäù—perception; tu—only; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
çéta—winter; uñëa—summer; sukha—happiness; duùkha-daù—giving pain;
ägama—appearing; 
apäyinaù—disappearing; 
anityäù—nonpermanent;
tän—all of them; titikñasva—just try to tolerate; bhärata—O descendant of the
Bhärata dynasty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of
winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.
PURPORT
In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate nonpermanent
appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress. According to Vedic
injunction, one has to take his bath early in the morning even during the
month of Mägha (January-February). It is very cold at that time, but in spite of
that a man who abides by the religious principles does not hesitate to take his
bath. Similarly, a woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the


--- Page 30 ---
30
months of May and June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to
execute his duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the
religious principle of the kñatriyas, and although one has to fight with some
friend or relative, one should not deviate from his prescribed duty. One has to
follow the prescribed rules and regulations of religious principles in order to
rise up to the platform of knowledge because by knowledge and devotion only
can one liberate himself from the clutches of mäyä (illusion).
The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also significant. To
address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood relations from his mother's
side; and to address him as Bhärata signifies his greatness from his father's side.
From both sides he is supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings
responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore, he cannot
avoid fighting.
TEXT 15
Ya& ih Na VYaQaYaNTYaeTae Pauåz& PauåzzR>a )
SaMadu"%Sau%& Daqr& Saae_Ma*TaTvaYa k-LPaTae )) 15 ))
yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so 'måtatväya kalpate
yam—one who; hi—certainly; na—never; vyathayanti—are distressing;
ete—all these; puruñam—to a person; puruñarñabha—is best among men;
sama—unaltered; duùkha—distress; sukham—happiness; dhéram—patient;
saù—he; amåtatväya—for liberation; kalpate—is considered eligible.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 31 ---
31
O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.
PURPORT
Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of distress and
happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation. In the varëäçrama
institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the renounced order (sannyäsa) is a
painstaking situation. But one who is serious about making his life perfect
surely adopts the sannyäsa order of life in spite of all difficulties. The
difficulties usually arise from having to sever family relationships, to give up
the connection of wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such
difficulties, surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, in
Arjuna's discharge of duties as a kñatriya, he is advised to persevere, even if it is
difficult to fight with his family members or similarly beloved persons. Lord
Caitanya took sannyäsa at the age of twenty-four, and His dependants, young
wife as well as old mother, had no one else to look after them. Yet for a higher
cause He took sannyäsa and was steady in the discharge of higher duties. That
is the way of achieving liberation from material bondage.
TEXT 16
NaaSaTaae ivÛTae >aavae Naa>aavae ivÛTae SaTa" )
o>aYaaeriPa d*íae_NTaSTvNaYaaeSTatvdiXaRi>a" )) 16 ))
näsato vidyate bhävo
näbhävo vidyate sataù
ubhayor api dåñöo 'ntas
tv anayos tattva-darçibhiù


--- Page 32 ---
32
na—never; 
asataù—of 
the 
nonexistent; 
vidyate—there 
is;
bhävaù—endurance; na—never; abhävaù—changing quality; vidyate—there
is; sataù—of the eternal; ubhayoù—of the two; api—verily; dåñöaù—observed;
antaù—conclusion; tu—but; anayoù—of them; tattva—truth; darçibhiù—by
the seers.
TRANSLATION
Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent
there is no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. This seers have
concluded by studying the nature of both.
PURPORT
There is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is admitted by
modern medical science; and thus growth and old age are taking place in the
body. But the spirit soul exists permanently, remaining the same despite all
changes of the body and the mind. That is the difference between matter and
spirit. By nature, the body is ever changing, and the soul is eternal. This
conclusion is established by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist
and personalist. In the Viñëu Puräëa it is stated that Viñëu and His abodes all
have self-illuminated spiritual existence. "Jyotéàñi viñëur bhavanäni viñëuù."
The words existent and nonexistent refer only to spirit and matter. That is the
version of all seers of truth.
This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the living entities
who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal of ignorance
involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationship between the worshiper
and the worshipable and the consequent understanding of the difference
between the part and parcel living entities and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One can understand the nature of the Supreme by thorough study of


--- Page 33 ---
33
oneself, the difference between oneself and the Supreme being understood as
the relationship between the part and the whole. In the Vedänta-sütras, as well
as in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin of
all emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior and inferior
natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superior nature, as it will
be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although there is no difference between
the energy and the energetic, the energetic is accepted as the Supreme, and
energy or nature is accepted as the subordinate. The living entities, therefore,
are always subordinate to the Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and
the servant, or the teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible
to understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away such ignorance
the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gétä for the enlightenment of all living entities
for all time.
TEXT 17
AivNaaiXa Tau TaiÜiÖ YaeNa SavRiMad& TaTaMa( )
ivNaaXaMaVYaYaSYaaSYa Na k-iêTk-TauRMahRiTa )) 17 ))
avinäçi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idaà tatam
vinäçam avyayasyäsya
na kaçcit kartum arhati
avinäçi—imperishable; tu—but; tat—that; viddhi—know it; yena—by whom;
sarvam—all 
of 
the 
body; 
idam—this; 
tatam—widespread;
vinäçam—destruction; avyayasya—of the imperishable; asya—of it; na
kaçcit—no one; kartum—to do; arhati—able.
TRANSLATION


--- Page 34 ---
34
Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is able to
destroy the imperishable soul.
PURPORT
This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is spread
all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over the body: it is
consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and pleasures of the body in
part or as a whole. This spreading of consciousness is limited within one's own
body. The pains and pleasures of one body are unknown to another. Therefore,
each and every body is the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom
of the soul's presence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul is
described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair point in
size. The Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad confirms this:
bälägra-çata-bhägasya çatadhä kalpitasya ca
bhägo jévaù sa vijïeyaù sa cänantyäya kalpate.
"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and again
each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such part is
the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul." (Svet. 5.9) Similarly, in
the Bhägavatam the same version is stated:
keçägra-çata-bhägasya çatäàçaù sädåçätmakaù
jévaù sükñma-svarupo 'yaà saìkhyätéto hi cit-kaëaù
"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured as one
ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair." [Madhya 19.140]
Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atom smaller
than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. This very small
spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body, and the influence of
such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body as the influence of the active
principle of some medicine spreads throughout the body. This current of the


--- Page 35 ---
35
spirit soul is felt all over the body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the
presence of the soul. Any layman can understand that the material body minus
consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revived in the
body by any means of material administration. Therefore, consciousness is not
due to any amount of material combination, but to the spirit soul. In the
Muëòaka Upaniñad the measurement of the atomic spirit soul is further
explained:
eño 'ëurätmä cetasä veditavyo
yasmin präëaù païcadhä saàviveça
präëaiç cittaà sarvam otam prajänäà
yasmin viçuddhe vibhavaty eña ätmä.
"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect intelligence. This
atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air [präëa, apäna, vyäna, samäna and
udäna], is situated within the heart, and spreads its influence all over the body
of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from the
contamination of the five kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is
exhibited." (Muëò. 3.1.9)
The haöha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of air
encircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures-not for any
material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the entanglement of
the material atmosphere.
So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedic literatures,
and it is also actually felt in the practical experience of any sane man. Only the
insane man can think of this atomic soul as all-pervading Viñëu-tattva.
The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particular body.
According to the Muëòaka Upaniñad, this atomic soul is situated in the heart
of every living entity, and because the measurement of the atomic soul is
beyond the power of appreciation of the material scientists, some of them


--- Page 36 ---
36
assert foolishly that there is no soul. The individual atomic soul is definitely
there in the heart along with the Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily
movement are emanating from this part of the body. The corpuscles which
carry the oxygen from the lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul
passes away from this position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases.
Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but it cannot
ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medical science, however,
does admit that the heart is the seat of all energies of the body.
Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules. Similarly,
the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks of the rays of the
Supreme Lord, called by the name prabhä or superior energy. Neither Vedic
knowledge nor modern science denies the existence of the spirit soul in the
body, and the science of the soul is explicitly described in the Bhagavad-gétä by
the Personality of Godhead Himself.
TEXT 18
ANTavNTa wMae deha iNaTYaSYaae¢-a" Xarqir<a" )
ANaaiXaNaae_Pa[MaeYaSYa TaSMaaÛuDYaSv >aarTa )) 18 ))
antavanta ime dehä
nityasyoktäù çarériëaù
anäçino 'prameyasya
tasmäd yudhyasva bhärata
antavantaù—perishable; 
ime—all 
these; 
dehäù—material 
bodies;
nityasya—eternal in existence; uktäù—it is so said; sarériëaù—the embodied
souls; 
anäçinaù—never 
to 
be 
destroyed; 
aprameyasya—immeasurable;
tasmät—therefore; yudhyasva—fight; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata.


--- Page 37 ---
37
TRANSLATION
Only the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living
entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.
PURPORT
The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately, or it
may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only. There is no
chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul is so minute that it
cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of being killed. As mentioned
in the previous verse, it is so small that no one can have any idea how to
measure its dimension. So from both viewpoints there is no cause of
lamentation because the living entity can neither be killed as he is, nor can the
material body, which cannot be saved for any length of time, be permanently
protected. The minute particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body
according to his work, and therefore observance of religious principles should
be utilized. In the Vedänta-sütras the living entity is qualified as light because
he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight maintains the entire
universe, so the light of the soul maintains this material body. As soon as the
spirit soul is out of this material body, the body begins to decompose; therefore
it is the spirit soul which maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant.
Arjuna was advised to fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of
religion.
TEXT 19
Ya WNa& veita hNTaar& YaêENa& MaNYaTae hTaMa( )
o>aaE TaaE Na ivJaaNaqTaae NaaYa& hiNTa Na hNYaTae )) 19 ))
ya enaà vetti hantäraà


--- Page 38 ---
38
yaç cainaà manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijänéto
näyaà hanti na hanyate
yaù—anyone; enam—this; vetti—knows; hantäram—the killer; yaù—anyone;
ca—also; enam—this; manyate—thinks; hatam—killed; ubhau—both of them;
tau—they; na—never; vijänétaù—in knowledge; na—never; ayam—this;
hanti—kills; na—nor; hanyate—be killed.
TRANSLATION
He who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain, does not
understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slays not nor is slain.
PURPORT
When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be known
that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit soul is so small
that it is impossible to kill him by any material weapon, as is evident from the
previous verses. Nor is the living entity killable because of his spiritual
constitution. What is killed, or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This,
however, does not at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is,
"mähiàsyät sarva-bhütäni" never commit violence to anyone. Nor does
understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal slaughter.
Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable and is punishable
by the law of the state as well as by the law of the Lord. Arjuna, however, is
being engaged in killing for the principle of religion, and not whimsically.
TEXT 20
Na JaaYaTae iMa]YaTae va k-daic‚
 àaYa& >aUTva >aivTaa va Na >aUYa" )


--- Page 39 ---
39
AJaae iNaTYa" XaaìTaae_Ya& Paura<aae
 Na hNYaTae hNYaMaaNae Xarqre )) 20 ))
na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcin
näyaà bhütvä bhavitä vä na bhüyaù
ajo nityaù çäçvato 'yaà puräëo
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére
na—never; jäyate—takes birth; mriyate—never dies; vä—either; kadäcit—at
any time (past, present or future); na—never; ayam—this; bhütvä—came into
being; bhavitä—will come to be; vä—or; na—not; bhüyaù—or has come to be;
ajaù—unborn; 
nityaù—eternal; 
çäçvataù—permanent; 
ayam—this;
puräëaù—the oldest; na—never; hanyate—is killed; hanyamäne—being killed;
çarére—by the body.
TRANSLATION
For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he
ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He
is not slain when the body is slain.
PURPORT
Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit is one
with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body. Sometimes the soul
is called the steady, or küöastha. The body is subject to six kinds of
transformations. It takes its birth in the womb of the mother's body, remains
for some time, grows, produces some effects, gradually dwindles, and at last
vanishes into oblivion. The soul, however, does not go through such changes.
The soul is not born, but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes
its birth. The soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die.
Anything which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth,


--- Page 40 ---
40
he therefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing, and
primeval—that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into being. Under
the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth, etc., of the soul. The
soul does not at any time become old, as the body does. The so-called old man,
therefore, feels himself to be in the same spirit as in his childhood or youth.
The changes of the body do not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate
like a tree, nor anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The
by-products of the body, namely children, are also different individual souls;
and, owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The body
develops because of the soul's presence, but the soul has neither offshoots nor
change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes of the body.
In the Kaöha Upaniñad also we find a similar passage which reads:
na jäyate mriyate vä vipaçcin
näyaà kutaçcin na vibhüva kaçcit
ajo nityaù çäçvato 'yaà puräëo
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére.
(Kaöha 1.2.18)
The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-gétä, but
here in this verse there is one special word, vipaçcit, which means learned or
with knowledge.
The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness. Therefore,
consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does not find the soul
within the heart, where he is situated, one can still understand the presence of
the soul simply by the presence of consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the
sun in the sky owing to clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the
sun is always there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon
as there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can understand that
the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some consciousness in all
bodies—whether man or animal—we can understand the presence of the soul.


--- Page 41 ---
41
This consciousness of the soul is, however, different from the consciousness of
the Supreme because the supreme consciousness is all-knowledge—past,
present and future. The consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be
forgetful. When he is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and
enlightenment from the superior lessons of Kåñëa. But Kåñëa is not like the
forgetful soul. If so, Kåñëa's teachings of Bhagavad-gétä would be useless.


--- Page 42 ---
42


--- Page 43 ---
43
There are two kinds of souls-namely the minute particle soul (aëu-ätmä)
and the Supersoul (the vibhu-ätmä). This is also confirmed in the Kaöha
Upaniñad in this way:
aëor aëéyän mahato mahéyän
ätmäsya jantor nihito guhäyäm
tam akratuù paçyati véta-çoko
dhätuù prasädän mahimänam ätmanaù
(Kaöha 1.2.20)
"Both the Supersoul [Paramätmä] and the atomic soul [jévätmä] are situated
on the same tree of the body within the same heart of the living being, and
only one who has become free from all material desires as well as lamentations
can, by the grace of the Supreme, understand the glories of the soul." Kåñëa is
the fountainhead of the Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following
chapters, and Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore
he requires to be enlightened by Kåñëa, or by His bona fide representative (the
spiritual master).
TEXT 21
vedaivNaaiXaNa& iNaTYa& Ya WNaMaJaMaVYaYaMa( )
k-Qa& Sa Pauåz" PaaQaR k&- gaaTaYaiTa hiNTa k-Ma( )) 21 ))
vedävinäçinaà nityaà
ya enam ajam avyayam
kathaà sa puruñaù pärtha
kaà ghätayati hanti kam
veda—in knowledge; avinäçinam—indestructible; nityam—always; yaù—one
who; enam—this (soul); ajam—unborn; avyayam—immutable; katham—how;


--- Page 44 ---
44
saù—he; puruñaù—person; pärtha—O Pärtha (Arjuna); kam—whom;
ghätayati—hurts; hanti—kills; kam—whom.
TRANSLATION
O Pärtha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,
unborn, eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?
PURPORT
Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in complete
knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper utility.
Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply violence rests with the
person in knowledge. Although the justice of the peace awards capital
punishment to a person condemned for murder, the justice of the peace cannot
be blamed because he orders violence to another person according to the codes
of justice. In Manu-saàhitä, the lawbook for mankind, it is supported that a
murderer should be condemned to death so that in his next life he will not
have to suffer for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king's
punishment of hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Kåñëa
orders fighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice, and,
as such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that such violence,
committed in the act of fighting for Kåñëa, is not violence at all because, at any
rate, the man, or rather the soul, cannot be killed; so for the administration of
justice, so-called violence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill
the patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed by Arjuna
at the instruction of Kåñëa is with full knowledge, so there is no possibility of
sinful reaction.
TEXT 22


--- Page 45 ---
45
vaSaa&iSa Jaq<aaRiNa YaQaa ivhaYa
 NavaiNa Ga*õaiTa Narae_Parai<a )
TaQaa Xarqrai<a ivhaYa Jaq<aaR‚
 NYaNYaaiNa Sa&YaaiTa NavaiNa dehq )) 22 ))
väsäàsi jérëäni yathä vihäya
naväni gåhëäti naro 'paräëi
tathä çaréräëi vihäya jérëäny
anyäni saàyäti naväni dehé
väsäàsi—garments; jérëäni—old and worn out; yathä—as it is; vihäya—giving
up; 
naväni—new 
garments; 
gåhëäti—does 
accept; 
naraù—a 
man;
aparäëi—other; tathä—in the same way; çaréräëi—bodies; vihäya—giving up;
jérëäni—old 
and 
useless; 
anyäni—different; 
saàyäti—verily 
accepts;
naväni—new sets; dehé—the embodied.
TRANSLATION
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the soul
accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.
PURPORT
Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even some
of the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of the soul, but at
the same time cannot explain the source of energy from the heart, have to
accept continuous changes of body which appear from childhood to boyhood
and from boyhood to youth and again from youth to old age. From old age, the
change is transferred to another body. This has already been explained in the
previous verse.
Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made possible


--- Page 46 ---
46
by the grace of the Supersoul.The Supersoul fulfills the desire of the atomic
soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another. The Vedas, like the Muëòaka
Upaniñad, as well as the Çvetäçvatara Upanisad, compare the soul and the
Supersoul to two friendly birds sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the
individual atomic soul) is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird
(Kåñëa) is simply watching His friend. Of these two birds—although they are
the same in quality—one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while
the other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Kåñëa is the
witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are friends, one
is still the master and the other is the servant. Forgetfulness of this relationship
by the atomic soul is the cause of one's changing his position from one tree to
another or from one body to another. The jéva soul is struggling very hard on
the tree of the material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird
as the supreme spiritual master—as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrender
unto Kåñëa for instruction—the subordinate bird immediately becomes free
from all lamentations. Both the Kaöha Upaniñad and Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad
confirm this:
samäne våkñe puruño nimagno
'néçayä çocati muhyamänaù
juñöaà yadä paçyaty anyam éçam asya
mahimänam iti véta-çokaù
[Muëòaka Upaniñad 3.1.2]
"Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully engrossed
with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of the tree. But if in
some way or other he turns his face to his friend who is the Lord and knows His
glories—at once the suffering bird becomes free from all anxieties." Arjuna has
now turned his face towards his eternal friend, Kåñëa, and is understanding the
Bhagavad-gétä from Him. And thus, hearing from Kåñëa, he can understand the
supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.


--- Page 47 ---
47
Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily change
of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be happy to kill their
bodies in the righteous fight so that they may be cleansed at once of all
reactions from various bodily activities. One who lays down his life on the
sacrificial altar, or in the proper battlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily
reactions and promoted to a higher status of life. So there was no cause for
Arjuna's lamentation.
TEXT 23
NaENa& i^NdiNTa Xañai<a NaENa& dhiTa Paavk-" )
Na cENa& (c)e-dYaNTYaaPaae Na XaaezYaiTa MaaåTa" )) 23 ))
nainaà chindanti çasträëi
nainaà dahati pävakaù
na cainaà kledayanty äpo
na çoñayati märutaù
na—never; enam—unto this soul; chindanti—can cut into pieces; çasträëi—all
weapons; na—never; enam—unto this soul; dahati—burns; pävakaù—fire;
na—never; 
ca—also; 
enam—unto 
this 
soul; 
kledayanti—moistens;
äpaù—water; na—never; çoñayati—dries; märutaù—wind.
TRANSLATION
The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can he be burned
by fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.
PURPORT
All kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc., are unable to kill


--- Page 48 ---
48
the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kinds of weapons made of earth,
water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the modern weapons of fire. Even the
nuclear weapons of the modern age are classified as fire weapons, but formerly
there were other weapons made of all different types of material elements.
Firearms were counteracted by water weapons, which are now unknown to
modern science. Nor do modern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons.
Nonetheless, the soul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any
number of weapons, regardless of scientific devices.
Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original Soul.
The Mäyävädé, however, cannot describe how the individual soul evolved from
ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory energy. Because they
are atomic individual souls (sanätana) eternally, they are prone to be covered
by the illusory energy, and thus they become separated from the association of
the Supreme Lord, just as the sparks of the fire, although one in quality with
the fire, are prone to be extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varäha
Puräëa, the living entities are described as separated parts and parcels of the
Supreme. They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gétä also. So, even
after being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a separate identity,
as is evident from the teachings of the Lord to Arjuna. Arjuna became
liberated by the knowledge received from Kåñëa, but he never became one with
Kåñëa.
TEXT 24
AC^eÛae_YaMadaùae_YaMa(c)e-Ûae_XaaeZYa Wv c )
iNaTYa" SavRGaTa" SQaa<aurcl/ae_Ya& SaNaaTaNa" )) 24 ))
acchedyo 'yam adähyo 'yam
akledyo 'çoñya eva ca
nityaù sarva-gataù sthäëur


--- Page 49 ---
49
acalo 'yaà sanätanaù
acchedyaù—unbreakable; ayam—this soul; adähyaù—cannot be burned;
ayam—this 
soul; 
akledyaù—insoluble; 
açoñyaù—cannot 
be 
dried;
eva—certainly; ca—and; nityaù—everlasting; sarva-gataù—all-pervading;
sthäëuù—unchangeable; 
acalaù—immovable; 
ayam—this 
soul;
sanätanaù—eternally the same.
TRANSLATION
This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned
nor dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and
eternally the same.
PURPORT
All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole, and he
remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory of monism is
very difficult to apply in this case, because the individual soul is never
expected to become one homogeneously. After liberation from material
contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as a spiritual spark in the
effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the intelligent souls
enter into the spiritual planets to associate with the Personality of Godhead.
The word sarva-gataù (all-pervading) is significant because there is no
doubt that living entities are all over God's creation. They live on the land, in
the water, in the air, within the earth and even within fire. The belief that
they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable, because it is clearly stated here that
the soul cannot be burned by fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are
living entities also in the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the
sun globe is uninhabited, then the word sarva-gataù—living
everywhere—becomes meaningless.


--- Page 50 ---
50
TEXT 25
AVYa¢-ae_YaMaicNTYaae_YaMaivk-aYaaeR_YaMauCYaTae )
TaSMaadev& ividTvENa& NaaNauXaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 25 ))
avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikäryo 'yam ucyate
tasmäd evaà viditvainaà
nänuçocitum arhasi
avyaktaù—invisible; ayam—this soul; acintyaù—inconceivable; ayam—this
soul; 
avikäryaù—unchangeable; 
ayam—this 
soul; 
ucyate—is 
said;
tasmät—therefore; evam—like this; viditvä—knowing it well; enam—this soul;
na—do not; anuçocitum—may lament over; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.
PURPORT
As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful
microscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul's existence is
concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond the proof
of çruti or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth, because there is no
other source of understanding the existence of the soul, although it is a fact by
perception. There are many things we have to accept solely on grounds of
superior authority. No one can deny the existence of his father, based upon the
authority of his mother. There is no other source of understanding the identity


--- Page 51 ---
51
of the father except by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no other
source of understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,
the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is
consciousness and conscious—that also is the statement of the Vedas, and we
have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no change in the soul.
As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomic in comparison to the
infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is infinite, and the atomic soul is
infinitesimal. Therefore, the infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never
become equal to the infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
concept is repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stability
of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in order
that we understand the matter thoroughly without error.
TEXT 26
AQa cENa& iNaTYaJaaTa& iNaTYa& va MaNYaSae Ma*TaMa( )
TaQaaiPa Tv& Mahabahae NaENa& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 26 ))
atha cainaà nitya-jätaà
nityaà vä manyase måtam
tathäpi tvaà mahä-bäho
nainaà çocitum arhasi
atha—if, however; ca—also; enam—this soul; nitya-jätam—always born;
nityam—forever; vä—either; manyase—so think; måtam—dead; tathäpi—still;
tvam—you; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one; na—never; enam—about the
soul; çocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always dies, still


--- Page 52 ---
52
you have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.
PURPORT
There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists, who do
not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the body. When Lord
Kåñëa spoke the Bhagavad-gétä, it appears that such philosophers existed, and
they were known as the Lokäyatikas and Vaibhäñikas. These philosophers
maintained that life symptoms, or soul, takes place at a certain mature
condition of material combination. The modern material scientist and
materialist philosophers also think similarly. According to them, the body is a
combination of physical elements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms
develop by interaction of the physical and chemical elements. The science of
anthropology 
is 
based 
on 
this 
philosophy. 
Currently, 
many
pseudo-religions—now becoming fashionable in America—are also adhering
to this philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist sects.
Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul—as in the
Vaibhäñika philosophy—there would still have been no cause for lamentation.
No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals and stops discharging his
prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modern science and scientific warfare,
so many tons of chemicals are wasted for achieving victory over the enemy.
According to the Vaibhäñika philosophy, the so-called soul or ätmä vanishes
along with the deterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna
accepted the Vedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did
not believe in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament. According
to this theory, since there are so many living entities generating out of matter
every moment, and so many of them are being vanquished every moment,
there is no need to grieve for such an incidence. However, since he was not
risking rebirth of the soul, Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected
with sinful reactions due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the
same time, Kåñëa sarcastically addressed Arjuna as mahä-bähu, mighty-armed,


--- Page 53 ---
53
because He, at least, did not accept the theory of the Vaibhäñikas, which leaves
aside the Vedic wisdom. As a kñatriya, Arjuna belonged to the Vedic culture,
and it behooved him to continue to follow its principles.
TEXT 27
JaaTaSYa ih Da]uvae Ma*TYauDa]uRv& JaNMa Ma*TaSYa c )
TaSMaadPairhaYaeR_QaeR Na Tv& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 27 ))
jätasya hi dhruvo måtyur
dhruvaà janma måtasya ca
tasmäd aparihärye 'rthe
na tvaà çocitum arhasi
jätasya—one who has taken his birth; hi—certainly; dhruvaù—a fact;
måtyuù—death; dhruvam—it is also a fact; janma—birth; måtasya—of the
dead; ca—also; tasmät—therefore; aparihärye—for that which is unavoidable;
arthe—in the matter of; na—do not; tvam—you; çocitum—to lament;
arhasi—deserve.
TRANSLATION
For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead,
birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you
should not lament.
PURPORT
One has to take birth according to one's activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the next. In this
way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one after the other without
liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not, however, support


--- Page 54 ---
54
unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same time, violence and war
are inevitable factors in human society for keeping law and order.
The Battle of Kurukñetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an inevitable
event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a kñatriya. Why should he
be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his relatives since he was discharging
his proper duty? He did not deserve to break the law, thereby becoming
subjected to the reactions of sinful acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding
the discharge of his proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his
relatives, and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.
TEXT 28
AVYa¢-adqiNa >aUTaaiNa VYa¢-MaDYaaiNa >aarTa )
AVYa¢-iNaDaNaaNYaev Ta}a k-a PairdevNaa )) 28 ))
avyaktädéni bhütäni
vyakta-madhyäni bhärata
avyakta-nidhanäny eva
tatra kä paridevanä
avyaktädéni—in the beginning unmanifested; bhütäni—all that are created;
vyakta—manifested; madhyäni—in the middle; bhärata—O descendant of
Bharata; avyakta—nonmanifested; nidhanäni—all that are vanquished;
eva—it is all like that; tatra—therefore; kä—what; paridevanä—lamentation.
TRANSLATION
All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So what need is


--- Page 55 ---
55
there for lamentation?
PURPORT
Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in the
existence of soul and the other not believing in the existence of the soul, there
is no cause for lamentation in either case. Nonbelievers in the existence of the
soul are called atheists by followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for
argument's sake, we accept the atheistic theory, there is still no cause for
lamentation. Apart from the separate existence of the soul, the material
elements remain unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of
unmanifestation comes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from
air, fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestations take
place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the earth. When it
is dismantled, the manifestation becomes again unmanifested and remains as
atoms in the ultimate stage. The law of conservation of energy remains, but in
course of time things are manifested and unmanifested—that is the difference.
Then what cause is there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation
or unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage, things
are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements remain
unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, and this does not
make any real material difference.
And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä
(antavanta ime dehäù) that these material bodies are perishable in due course of
time (nityasyoktäù çarériëaù) but that soul is eternal, then we must remember
always that the body is like a dress; therefore why lament the changing of a
dress? The material body has no factual existence in relation to the eternal
soul. It is something like a dream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky,
or sitting on a chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are
neither in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages


--- Page 56 ---
56
self-realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.
Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of the soul, or
one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no cause for
lamentation for loss of the body.
TEXT 29
AaêYaRvTPaXYaiTa k-iêdeNa‚
 MaaêYaRvÜdiTa TaQaEv caNYa" )
AaêYaRvÀENaMaNYa" é*<aaeiTa
 é[uTvaPYaeNa& ved Na cEv k-iêTa( )) 29 ))
äçcaryavat paçyati kaçcid enam
äçcaryavad vadati tathaiva cänyaù
äçcaryavac cainam anyaù çåëoti
çrutväpy enaà veda na caiva kaçcit
äçcaryavat—amazing; 
paçyati—see; 
kaçcit—some; 
enam—this 
soul;
äçcaryavat—amazing; vadati—speak; tathä—there; eva—certainly; ca—also;
anyaù—others; äçcaryavat—similarly amazing; ca—also; enam—this soul;
anyaù—others; çåëoti—hear; çrutvä—having heard; api—even; enam—this
soul; veda—do know; na—never; ca—and; eva—certainly; kaçcit—anyone.
TRANSLATION
Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some
hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about him, cannot
understand him at all.
PURPORT


--- Page 57 ---
57
Since Gétopaniñad is largely based on the principles of the Upaniñads, it is
not surprising to also find this passage in the Kaöha Upaniñad [1.2.7].
çravaëäyäpi bahubhir yo na labhyaù
çåëvanto 'pi bahavo yaù na vidyuù
äçcaryo vaktä kuçalo 'sya labdhä
äçcaryo jïätä kuçalänuçiñöaù.
The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal, in the
body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs, millions and
billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is certainly very amazing. Men
with a poor fund of knowledge and men who are not austere cannot
understand the wonders of the individual atomic spark of spirit, even though it
is explained by the greatest authority of knowledge, who imparted lessons even
to Brahmä, the first living being in the universe. Owing to a gross material
conception of things, most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small
particle can become both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper
as wonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by the material
energy, people are so engrossed in subject matter for sense gratification that
they have very little time to understand the question of self-understanding,
even though it is a fact that without this self-understanding all activities result
in ultimate defeat in the struggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that
one must think of the soul, and also make a solution of the material miseries.
Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attending
lectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, they are
misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one without
distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a man who perfectly
understands the position of the soul, the Supersoul, the atomic soul, their
respective functions, relationships and all other major and minor details. And
it is still more difficult to find a man who has actually derived full benefit from
knowledge of the soul, and who is able to describe the position of the soul in


--- Page 58 ---
58
different aspects. But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the
subject matter of the soul, then one's life is successful. The easiest process for
understanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept the statements
of the Bhagavad-gétä spoken by the greatest authority, Lord Kåñëa, without
being deviated by other theories. But it also requires a great deal of penance
and sacrifice, either in this life or in the previous ones, before one is able to
accept Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kåñëa can, however, be
known as such by the causeless mercy of the pure devotee and by no other way.
TEXT 30
dehq iNaTYaMavDYaae_Ya& dehe SavRSYa >aarTa )
TaSMaaTSavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa Na Tv& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 30 ))
dehé nityam avadhyo 'yaà
dehe sarvasya bhärata
tasmät sarväëi bhütäni
na tvaà çocitum arhasi
dehé—the owner of the material body; nityam—eternally; avadhyaù—cannot
be killed; ayam—this soul; dehe—in the body; sarvasya—of everyone;
bhärata—O 
descendant 
of 
Bharata; 
tasmät—therefore; 
sarväëi—all;
bhütäni—living entities (that are born); na—never; tvam—yourself;
çocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can never
be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.
PURPORT


--- Page 59 ---
59
The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable spirit
soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, Lord Kåñëa establishes
that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary. Therefore Arjuna as a
kñatriya should not abandon his duty out of fear that his grandfather and
teacher—Bhéñma and Droëa—will die in the battle. On the authority of Çré
Kåñëa, one has to believe that there is a soul different from the material body,
not that there is no such thing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a
certain stage of material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals.
Though the soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time of war
it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That need must be
justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not capriciously.
TEXT 31
SvDaMaRMaiPa cave+Ya Na ivk-iMPaTauMahRiSa )
DaMYaaRiÖ YauÖaC^\eYaae_NYaT+ai}aYaSYa Na ivÛTae )) 31 ))
svadharmam api cävekñya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyäddhi yuddhäc chreyo 'nyat
kñatriyasya na vidyate
svadharmam—one's 
own 
religious 
principles; 
api—also; 
ca—indeed;
avekñya—considering; na—never; vikampitum—to hesitate; arhasi—you
deserve; dharmyät—from religious principles; hi—indeed; yuddhät—of
fighting; çreyaù—better engagements; anyat—anything else; kñatriyasya—of
the kñatriya; na—does not; vidyate—exist.
TRANSLATION
Considering your specific duty as a kñatriya, you should know that there is


--- Page 60 ---
60
no better engagement for you than fighting on religious principles; and so there
is no need for hesitation.
PURPORT
Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for the
matter of good administration, is called kñatriya. Kñat means hurt. One who
gives protection from harm is called kñatriya (trayate—to give protection). The
kñatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. A kñatriya would go into the forest
and challenge a tiger face to face and fight with the tiger with his sword. When
the tiger was killed, it would be offered the royal order of cremation. This
system is being followed even up to the present day by the kñatriya kings of
Jaipur state. The kñatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killing
because religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore, kñatriyas
are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyäsa or renunciation.
Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it is never a factor or
principle. In the religious law books it is stated:
ähaveñu mitho 'nyonyaà jighäàsanto mahékñitaù
yuddhamänäù paraà çaktyä svargaà yänty aparäìmukhäù
yajïeñu paçavo brahman hanyante satataà dvijaiù
saàskåtäù kila mantraiç ca te 'pi svargam aväpnuvan.
"In the battlefield, a king or kñatriya, while fighting another king envious of
him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death, as the brähmaëas
also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificing animals in the sacrificial fire."
Therefore, killing on the battle on the religious principle and the killing of
animals in the sacrificial fire are not at all considered to be acts of violence,
because everyone is benefitted by the religious principles involved. The animal
sacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradual
evolutionary process from one form to another, and the kñatriyas killed in the
battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brähmaëas who attain


--- Page 61 ---
61
them by offering sacrifice.
There are two kinds of svadharmas, specific duties. As long as one is not
liberated, one has to perform the duties of that particular body in accordance
with religious principles in order to achieve liberation. When one is liberated,
one's svadharma—specific duty—becomes spiritual and is not in the material
bodily concept. In the bodily conception of life there are specific duties for the
brähmaëas and kñatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable.
Svadharma is ordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth
Chapter. On the bodily plane svadharma is called varëäçrama-dharma, or man's
steppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization begins from the
stage of varëäçrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of the specific modes of
nature of the body obtained. Discharging one's specific duty in any field of
action in accordance with varëäçrama-dharma serves to elevate one to a higher
status of life.
TEXT 32
Yad*C^Yaa caePaPaà& SvGaRÜarMaPaav*TaMa( )
Saui%Na" +ai}aYaa" PaaQaR l/>aNTae YauÖMaqd*XaMa( )) 32 ))
yadåcchayä copapannaà
svarga-dväram apävåtam
sukhinaù kñatriyäù pärtha
labhante yuddham édåçam
yadåcchayä—by 
its 
own 
accord; 
ca—also; 
upapannam—arrived 
at;
svarga—heavenly 
planet; 
dväram—door; 
apävåtam—wide 
open;
sukhinaù—very happy; kñatriyäù—the members of the royal order; pärtha—O
son of Påthä; labhante—do achieve; yuddham—war; édåçam—like this.


--- Page 62 ---
62
TRANSLATION
O Pärtha, happy are the kñatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities come
unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.
PURPORT
As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Kåñëa condemns the attitude of
Arjuna who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It will cause perpetual
habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were due to ignorance only. He
wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of his specific duty. For a
kñatriya to be in the battlefield and to become nonviolent is the philosophy of
fools. In the Paräçara-småti [1.58] or religious codes made by Paräçara, the great
sage and father of Vyäsadeva, it is stated:
kñatriyo hi prajä rakñan çastra-päëiù pradaëòayan
nirjitya parasainyädi kñitià dharmeëa pälayet.
"The kñatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of difficulties, and
for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable cases for law and order.
Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of inimical kings, and thus, with
religious principles, he should rule over the world."
Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting. If he
should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he should die
in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets whose doors were
wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in either case.
TEXT 33
AQa cetviMaMa& DaMYa| Sa°aMa& Na k-irZYaiSa )


--- Page 63 ---
63
TaTa" SvDaMa| k-IiTa| c ihTva PaaPaMavaPSYaiSa )) 33 ))
atha cet tvam imaà dharmyaà
saìgrämaà-na kariñyasi
tataù svadharmaà kértià ca
hitvä päpam aväpsyasi
atha—therefore; cet—if; tvam—you; imam—this; dharmyam—religious duty;
saìgrämam—fighting; 
na—do 
not; 
kariñyasi—perform; 
tataù—then;
svadharmam—your religious duty; kértim—reputation; ca—also; hitvä—losing;
päpam—sinful reaction; aväpsyasi—do gain.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will certainly incur
sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your reputation as a fighter.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many great
demigods, including even Lord Çiva. After fighting and defeating Lord Çiva in
the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the Lord and received as a reward a
weapon called päçupata-astra. Everyone knew that he was a great warrior. Even
Droëäcärya gave him benediction and awarded him the special weapon by
which he could kill even his teacher. So he was credited with so many military
certificates from many authorities, including his adopted father Indra, the
heavenly king. But if he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his
specific duty as a kñatriya, but he would lose all his fame and good name and
thus prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell, not by
fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.
TEXT 34


--- Page 64 ---
64
Ak-IiTa| caiPa >aUTaaiNa k-QaiYaZYaiNTa Tae_VYaYaaMa( )
SaM>aaivTaSYa cak-IiTaRMaRr<aadiTairCYaTae )) 34 ))
akértià cäpi bhütäni
kathayiñyanti te 'vyayäm
sambhävitasya cäkértir
maraëäd atiricyate
akértim—infamy; ca—also; api—over and above; bhütäni—all people;
kathayiñyanti—will speak; te—of you; avyayäm—forever; sambhävitasya—for a
respectable 
man; 
ca—also; 
akértiù—ill 
fame; 
maraëät—than 
death;
atiricyate—becomes more than.
TRANSLATION
People will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been honored,
dishonor is worse than death.
PURPORT
Both as friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Kåñëa now gives His final
judgement regarding Arjuna's refusal to fight. The Lord says, "Arjuna, if you
leave the battlefield, people will call you a coward even before your actual
flight. And if you think that people may call you bad names but that you will
save your life by fleeing the battlefield, then My advice is that you'd do better
to die in the battle. For a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death.
So, you should not flee for fear of your life; better to die in the battle. That will
save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and from losing your
prestige in society."
So, the final judgement of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle and


--- Page 65 ---
65
not withdraw.
TEXT 35
>aYaad]<aaduParTa& Ma&SYaNTae Tva& MaharQaa" )
Yaeza& c Tv& bhuMaTaae >aUTva YaaSYaiSa l/agavMa( )) 35 ))
bhayäd raëäd uparataà
maàsyante tväà mahä-rathäù
yeñäà ca tvaà bahu-mato
bhütvä yäsyasi läghavam
bhayät—out of fear; raëät—from the battlefield; uparatam—ceased;
maàsyante—will consider; tväm—unto you; mahä-rathäù—the great generals;
yeñäm—of those who; ca—also; tvam—you; bahu-mataù—in great estimation;
bhütvä—will become; yäsyasi—will go; läghavam—decreased in value.
TRANSLATION
The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will think
that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus they will consider
you a coward.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: "Do not think that the
great generals like Duryodhana, Karëa, and other contemporaries will think
that you have left the battlefield out of compassion for your brothers and
grandfather. They will think that you have left out of fear for your life. And
thus their high estimation of your personality will go to hell."


--- Page 66 ---
66
TEXT 36
AvaCYavada&ê bhUNvidZYaiNTa TavaihTaa" )
iNaNdNTaSTav SaaMaQYa| TaTaae du"%Tar& Nau ik-Ma( )) 36 ))
aväcya-vädäàç ca bahün
vadiñyanti tavähitäù
nindantas tava sämarthyaà
tato duùkhataraà nu kim
aväcya—unkind; 
vädän—fabricated 
words; 
ca—also; 
bahün—many;
vadiñyanti—will say; tava—your; ahitäù—enemies; nindantaù—while vilifying;
tava—your; sämarthyam—ability; tataù—thereafter; duùkhataram—more
painful; nu—of course; kim—what is there.
TRANSLATION
Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your ability.
What could be more painful for you?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna's uncalled-for plea
for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the non-Aryans.
Now in so many words, He has proved His statements against Arjuna's
so-called compassion.
TEXT 37
hTaae va Pa[aPSYaiSa SvGa| iJaTva va >aae+YaSae MahqMa( )


--- Page 67 ---
67
TaSMaaduitaï k-aENTaeYa YauÖaYa k*-TaiNaêYa" )) 37 ))
hato vä präpsyasi svargaà
jitvä vä bhokñyase mahém
tasmäd uttiñöha kaunteya
yuddhäya kåta niçcayaù
hataù—being killed; vä—either; präpsyasi—you gain; svargam—the heavenly
kingdom; jitvä—by conquering; vä—or; bhokñyase—you enjoy; mahém—the
world; tasmät—therefore; uttiñöha—get up; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
yuddhäya—to fight; kåta—determination; niçcayaù—uncertainty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunté, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain the
heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom. Therefore
get up and fight with determination.
PURPORT
Even though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna's side, he still had
to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevated into the heavenly
planets.
TEXT 38
Sau%du"%e SaMae k*-Tva l/a>aal/a>aaE JaYaaJaYaaE )
TaTaae YauÖaYa YauJYaSv NaEv& PaaPaMavaPSYaiSa )) 38 ))
sukha-duùkhe same kåtvä
läbhäläbhau jayäjayau
tato yuddhäya yujyasva


--- Page 68 ---
68
naivaà päpam aväpsyasi
sukha—happiness; duùkhe—in distress; same—in equanimity; kåtvä—doing so;
läbhäläbhau—both in loss and profit; jayäjayau—both in defeat and victory;
tataù—thereafter; yuddhäya—for the sake of fighting; yujyasva—do fight;
na—never; evam—in this way; päpam—sinful reaction; aväpsyasi—you will
gain.
TRANSLATION
Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness or
distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat—and, by so doing, you shall never incur
sin.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of happiness
or distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in the activities of Kåñëa
consciousness. That everything should be performed for the sake of Kåñëa is
transcendental consciousness; so there is no reaction to material activities. He
who acts for his own sense gratification, either in goodness or in passion, is
subject to the reaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered
himself in the activities of Kåñëa consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of activities. It is
said:
devarñi-bhutäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyamåëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
(Bhäg. 11.5.41)


--- Page 69 ---
69
"Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Kåñëa, Mukunda, giving up all
other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone—not the
demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor kinsmen, nor humanity,
nor forefathers." That is the indirect hint given by Kåñëa to Arjuna in this
verse, and the matter will be more clearly explained in the following verses.
TEXT 39
Wza Tae_i>aihTaa Saa&:Yae buiÖYaaeRGae iTvMaa& é*<au )
buÖya Yau¢-ae YaYaa PaaQaR k-MaRbNDa& Pa[haSYaiSa )) 39 ))
eñä te 'bhihitä säìkhye
buddhir yoge tv imäà çåëu
buddhyä yukto yayä pärtha
karma-bandhaà prahäsyasi
eñä—all these; te—unto you; abhihitä—described; çäìkhye—by analytical
study; buddhiù—intelligence; yoge—work without fruitive result; tu—but;
imäm—this; çåëu—just hear; buddhyä—by intelligence; yuktaù—dovetailed;
yayä—by which; pärtha—O son of Påthä; karma-bandham—bondage of
reaction; prahäsyasi—you can be released from.
TRANSLATION
Thus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of säìkhya
philosophy. Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one works without
fruitive result. O son of Påthä, when you act by such intelligence, you can free
yourself from the bondage of works.
PURPORT


--- Page 70 ---
70
According to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, saìkhya means that
which describes phenomena in detail, and saìkhya refers to that philosophy
which describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga involves controlling the
senses. Arjuna's proposal not to fight was based on sense gratification.
Forgetting his prime duty, he wanted to cease fighting because he thought that
by not killing his relatives and kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying
the kingdom by conquering his cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhåtaräñöra.
In both ways, the basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness
derived from conquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive
are both on the basis of persona1 sense gratification, for there is a sacrifice of
wisdom and duty. Kåñëa, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that by killing
the body of his grandfather he would not be killing the soul proper, and He
explained that all individual persons, including the Lord Himself, are eternal
individuals; they were individuals in the past, they are individuals in the
present, and they will continue to remain individuals in the future, because all
of us are individual souls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in
different manners. But, actually, we keep our individuality even after
liberation from the bondage of material dress. An analytical study of the soul
and the body has been very graphically explained by Lord Kåñëa. And this
descriptive knowledge of the soul and the body from different angles of vision
has been described here as säìkhya, in terms of the Nirukti dictionary. This
säìkhya has nothing to do with the säìkhya philosophy of the atheist Kapila.
Long before the imposter Kapila's säìkhya, the säìkhya philosophy was
expounded in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam by the true Lord Kapila, the incarnation
of Lord Kåñëa, who explained it to His mother, Devahüti. It is clearly explained
by Him that the Puruña, or the Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by
looking over the prakåti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gétä. The
description in the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakåti, or
nature, and impregnated it with atomic individuals souls. All these individuals
are working in the material world for sense gratification, and under the spell of
material energy they are thinking of being enjoyers. This mentality is dragged


--- Page 71 ---
71
to the last point of liberation when the living entity wants to become one with
the Lord. This is the last snare of mäyä or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is
only after many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that a great
soul surrenders unto Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa, thereby fulfilling the search after
the ultimate truth.
Arjuna has already accepted Kåñëa as his spiritual master by surrendering
himself unto Him: çiñyas te 'haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam. Consequently,
Kåñëa will now tell him about the working process in buddhi-yoga, or
karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice of devotional service only for the
sense gratification of the Lord. This buddhi-yoga is clearly explained in
Chapter Ten, verse ten, as being direct communion with the Lord, who is
sitting as Paramätmä in everyone's heart. But such communion does not take
place without devotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional
or transcendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Kåñëa
consciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the special grace of the
Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who are always engaged in
devotional service out of transcendental love does He award the pure
knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devotee can reach Him easily in
the ever-blissful kingdom of God.
Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional service of
the Lord, and the word säìkhya mentioned herein has nothing to do with the
atheistic säìkhya-yoga enunciated by the impostor Kapila. One should not,
therefore, misunderstand that the säìkhya-yoga mentioned herein has any
connection with the atheistic säìkhya. Nor did that philosophy have any
influence during that time; nor would Lord Kåñëa care to mention such godless
philosophical speculations. Real säìkhya philosophy is described by Lord Kapila
in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, but even that säìkhya has nothing to do with the
current topics. Here, säìkhya means analytical description of the body and the
soul. Lord Kåñëa made an analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjuna
to the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Kåñëa's säìkhya


--- Page 72 ---
72
and Lord Kapila's säìkhya, as described in the Bhägavatam; are one and the
same. They are all bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, that only the less intelligent
class of men make a distinction between säìkhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga. [Bg. 5.3]
Of course, atheistic säìkhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga, yet
the unintelligent claim that the atheistic säìkhya-yoga is referred to in the
Bhagavad-gétä.
One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Kåñëa
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service. One who
works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficult such work may be,
is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and finds himself always in
transcendental bliss. By such transcendental engagement, one achieves all
transcendental qualities automatically, by the grace of the Lord, and thus his
liberation is complete in itself, without his making extraneous endeavors to
acquire knowledge. There is much difference between work in Kåñëa
consciousness and work for fruitive results, especially in the matter of sense
gratification for achieving results in terms of family or material happiness.
Buddhi-yoga is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we
perform.
TEXT 40
Naehai>a§-MaNaaXaae_iSTa Pa[TYavaYaae Na ivÛTae )
SvLPaMaPYaSYa DaMaRSYa }aaYaTae MahTaae >aYaaTa( )) 40 ))
nehäbhikrama-näço 'sti
pratyaväyo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
träyate mahato bhayät
na—there is not; iha—in this world; abhikrama—endeavoring; näçaù—loss;


--- Page 73 ---
73
asti—there is; pratyaväyaù—diminution; na—never; vidyate—there is;
svalpam—little; api—although; asya—of this; dharmasya—of this occupation;
träyate—releases; mahataù—of very great; bhayät—from danger.
TRANSLATION
In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on
this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear.
PURPORT
Activity in Kåñëa consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Kåñëa without
expectation of sense gratification, is the highest transcendental quality of
work. Even a small beginning of such activity finds no impediment, nor can
that small beginning be lost at any stage. Any work begun on the material
plane has to be completed, otherwise the whole attempt becomes a failure. But
any work begun in Kåñëa consciousness has a permanent effect, even though
not finished. The performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his
work in Kåñëa consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Kåñëa
consciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning is from the
point of two percent; whereas, in material activity, without a hundred percent
success, there is no profit. Ajämila performed his duty in some percentage of
Kåñëa consciousness, but the result he enjoyed at the end was a hundred
percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is a nice verse in this connection in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajan na pakko 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto 'bhajatäà sva-dharmataù
"If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Kåñëa
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing his work,


--- Page 74 ---
74
what loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if one performs his
material activities perfectly?" (Bhäg. 1.5.17) Or, as the Christians say, "What
profiteth a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss of his eternal
soul?"
Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in Kåñëa
consciousness carries the person again to Kåñëa consciousness, even after the
loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in the next life of being
born again as a human being, either in the family of a great cultured brähmaëa
or in a rich aristocratic family that will give one a further chance for elevation.
That is the unique quality of work done in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 41
VYavSaaYaaiTMak-a buiÖreke-h ku-åNaNdNa )
bhuXaa%a ùNaNTaaê buÖYaae_VYavSaaiYaNaaMa( )) 41 ))
vyavasäyätmikä buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca
buddhayo 'vyavasäyinäm
vyavasäyätmikä—resolute 
Kåñëa 
consciousness; 
buddhiù—intelligence;
ekä—only one; iha—in this world; kuru-nandana—O beloved child of the
Kurus; bahu-çäkhäù—various branches; hi—indeed; anantäù—unlimited;
ca—also; buddhayaù—intelligence; avyavasäyinäm—of those who are not in
Kåñëa consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O
beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is


--- Page 75 ---
75
many-branched.
PURPORT
A strong faith in Kåñëa consciousness that one should be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasäyätmikä intelligence. The
Caitanya-caritämåta [M. 22.62] states:
'çraddhä'-çabde viçväsa kahe sudåòha niçcaya
kåñëe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kåta haya
Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged in
the duties of Kåñëa consciousness, he need not act in relationship to the
material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity, or nationality.
Fruitive activities are the engagements of one's reactions from past good or bad
deeds. When one is awake in Kåñëa consciousness, he need no longer endeavor
for good results in his activities. When one is situated in Kåñëa consciousness,
all activities are on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to
dualities like good and bad. The highest perfection of Kåñëa consciousness is
renunciation of the material conception of life. This state is automatically
achieved by progressive Kåñëa consciousness. The resolute purpose of a person
in Kåñëa consciousness is based on knowledge ("Väsudevaù sarvam iti sa
mahätmä sudurlabhaù") by which one comes to know perfectly that Väsudeva,
or Kåñëa, is the root of all manifested causes. As water on the root of a tree is
automatically distributed to the leaves and branches, in Kåñëa consciousness,
one can render the highest service to everyone—namely self, family, society,
country, humanity, etc. If Kåñëa is satisfied by one's actions, then everyone will
be satisfied.
Service in Kåñëa consciousness is, however, best practiced under the able
guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative of Kåñëa, who
knows the nature of the student and who can guide him to act in Kåñëa
consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Kåñëa consciousness one has to act


--- Page 76 ---
76
firmly and obey the representative of Kåñëa, and one should accept the
instruction of the bona fide spiritual master as one's mission in life. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkur instructs us, in his famous prayers for the
spiritual master, as follows:
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo
yasyäprasädänna gatiù kuto 'pi
dhyäyaà stuvaàs tasya yaças tri-sandhyaà
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam.
[Gurv-añöaka 8]
"By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master, there is no
chance of being promoted to the plane of Kåñëa consciousness. I should,
therefore, meditate and pray for his mercy three times a day, and offer my
respectful obeisances unto him, my spiritual master."
The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soul
beyond the conception of the body—not theoretically but practically, when
there is no longer chance for sense gratification manifested in fruitive
activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by various types of
fruitive acts.
TEXTS 42-43
YaaiMaMaa& PauiZPaTaa& vac& Pa[vdNTYaivPaiêTa" )
vedvadrTaa" PaaQaR NaaNYadSTaqiTa vaidNa" )) 42 ))
k-aMaaTMaaNa" SvGaRPara JaNMak-MaRf-l/Pa[daMa( )
i§-YaaivXaezbhul/a& >aaeGaEìYaRGaiTa& Pa[iTa )) 43 ))
yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà


--- Page 77 ---
77
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù
kämätmänaù svarga-parä
janma-karma-phala-pradäm
kriyä-viçeña-bahuläà
bhogaiçvarya-gatià prati
yäm imäm—all these; puñpitäm—flowery; väcam—words; pravadanti—say;
avipaçcitaù—men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-väda-ratäù—supposed
followers of the Vedas; pärtha—O son of Påthä; na—never; anyat—anything
else; asti—there is; iti—this; vädinaù—advocates; käma-ätmänaù—desirous of
sense gratification; svarga-paräù—aiming to achieve heavenly planets;
janma-karma-phala-pradäm—resulting in fruitive action, good birth, etc.;
kriyä-viçeña—pompous 
ceremonies; 
bahuläm—various; 
bhoga—sense
enjoyment; aiçvarya—opulence; gatim—progress; prati—towards.
TRANSLATION
Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.
PURPORT
People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they
are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-käëòa
portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than sense
gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are
available and material opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices
are recommended for elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the


--- Page 78 ---
78
jyotiñöoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated that anyone desiring elevation to
heavenly planets must perform these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of
knowledge think that this is the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very
difficult for such inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined
action of Kåñëa consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous
trees without knowing the results of such attractions, similarly unenlightened
men are attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense enjoyment thereof.
In the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas it is said that those who perform
the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasa beverages to
become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some are very eager to
have somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense gratifications. Such
persons have no faith in liberation from material bondage, and they are very
much attached to the pompous ceremonies of Vedic sacrifices. They are
generally sensual, and they do not want anything other than the heavenly
pleasures of life. It is understood that there are gardens called nandana-känana
in which there is good opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful
women and having a profuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is
certainly sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,
temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.
TEXT 44
>aaeGaEìYaRPa[Sa¢-aNaa& TaYaaPaôTaceTaSaaMa( )
VYavSaaYaaiTMak-a buiÖ" SaMaaDaaE Na ivDaqYaTae )) 44 ))
bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà
tayäpahåta-cetasäm
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù
samädhau na vidhéyate


--- Page 79 ---
79
bhoga—material enjoyment; aiçvarya—opulence; prasaktänäm—those who are
so attached; tayä—by such things; apahåta-cetasäm—bewildered in mind;
vyavasäyätmikä—fixed determination; buddhiù—devotional service of the
Lord; samädhau—in the controlled mind; na—never; vidhéyate—does take
place.
TRANSLATION
In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination of
devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place.
PURPORT
Samädhi means "fixed mind." The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says,
samyag ädhéyate 'sminn ätmatattva-yäthätmyam: "When the mind is fixed for
understanding the self, it is called samädhi." Samädhi is never possible for
persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor for those who are
bewildered by such temporary things. They are more or less condemned by the
process of material energy.
TEXT 45
}aEGau<YaivzYaa veda iNañEGau<Yaae >avaJauRNa )
iNaÜRNÜae iNaTYaSatvSQaae iNaYaaeRGa+aeMa AaTMavaNa( )) 45 ))
traiguëya-viñayä vedä
nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän


--- Page 80 ---
80
traiguëya—pertaining to the three modes of material nature; viñayäù—on the
subject matter; vedäù—Vedic literatures; nistraiguëyaù—in a pure state of
spiritual existence; bhava—be; arjuna—O Arjuna; nirdvandvaù—free from the
pains of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthaù—ever remaining in sattva (goodness);
niryoga-kñemaù—free from (the thought of) acquisition and preservation;
ätmavän—established in the Self.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be
free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be
established in the Self.
PURPORT
All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three modes of
material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which cause bondage in
the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with fruitive activities to gradually
elevate the general public from the field of sense gratification to a position on
the transcendental plane. Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Kåñëa, is
advised to raise himself to the transcendental position of Vedänta philosophy
where, in the beginning, there is brahma-jijïäsä, or questions on the Supreme
Transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world are
struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after creation of the
material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to live and get rid of the
material entanglement. When the activities for sense gratification, namely the
karma-käëòa chapter, are finished, then the chance for spiritual realization is
offered in the form of the Upaniñads, which are part of different Vedas, as the
Bhagavad-gétä is a part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahäbhärata. The
Upaniñads mark the beginning of transcendental life.


--- Page 81 ---
81
As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in the
material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities such as
happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating such dualities
become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This transcendental
position is achieved in full Kåñëa consciousness when one is fully dependant
on the good will of Kåñëa
TEXT 46
YaavaNaQaR odPaaNae SavRTa" SaMPl/uTaaedke- )
TaavaNSaveRzu vedezu b]aø<aSYa ivJaaNaTa" )) 46 ))
yävän artha udapäne
sarvataù samplutodake
tävän sarveñu vedeñu
brähmaëasya vijänataù
yävän—all that; arthaù—is meant; udapäne—in a well of water; sarvataù—in
all respects; sampluta-udake—in a great reservoir of water; tävän—similarly;
sarveñu—in all; vedeñu—Vedic literatures; brähmaëasya—of the man who
knows the Supreme Brahman; vijänataù—of one who is in complete
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by the
great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas can be served
to one who knows the purpose behind them.
PURPORT


--- Page 82 ---
82
The rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-käëòa division of the
Vedic literature are to encourage gradual development of self-realization. And
the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated in the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15): the purpose of studying the Vedas is to know Lord Kåñëa,
the primeval cause of everything. So, self-realization means understanding
Kåñëa and one's eternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living
entities with Kåñëa is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä. The living entities are parts and parcels of Kåñëa; therefore,
revival of Kåñëa consciousness by the individual living entity is the highest
perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.33.7) as follows:
aho bata çvapaco'to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te.
"O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a
low family like that of a cäëòäla [dog eater], is situated on the highest platform
of self-realization. Such a person must have performed all kinds of penances
and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals and studied the Vedic literatures
many, many times after taking his bath in all the holy places of pilgrimage.
Such a person is considered to be the best of the Äryan family." So one must be
intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the Vedas, without being
attached to the rituals only, and must not desire to be elevated to the heavenly
kingdoms for a better quality of sense gratification. It is not possible for the
common man in this age to follow all the rules and regulations of the Vedic
rituals and the injunctions of the Vedäntas and the Upaniñads. It requires
much time, energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the
Vedas. This is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic culture is
served, however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, as recommended by
Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls. When Lord Caitanya was asked


--- Page 83 ---
83
by a great Vedic scholar, Prakäçänanda Sarasvaté, why He, the Lord, was
chanting the holy name of the Lord like a sentimentalist instead of studying
Vedänta philosophy, the Lord replied that His spiritual master found Him to be
a great fool, and thus he asked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Kåñëa. He
did so, and became ecstatic like a madman. In this age of Kali, most of the
population is foolish and not adequately educated to understand Vedänta
philosophy; the best purpose of Vedänta philosophy is served by inoffensively
chanting the holy name of the Lord. Vedänta is the last word in Vedic wisdom,
and the author and knower of the Vedänta philosophy is Lord Kåñëa; and the
highest Vedantist is the great soul who takes pleasure in chanting the holy
name of the Lord. That is the ultimate purpose of all Vedic mysticism.
TEXT 47
k-MaR<YaevaiDak-arSTae Maa f-le/zu k-dacNa )
Maa k-MaRf-l/heTau>aURMaaR Tae Sa(r)ae_STvk-MaRi<a )) 47 ))
karmaëy evädhikäras te
mä phaleñu kadäcana
mä karma-phala-hetur bhür
mä te saìgo 'stv akarmaëi
karmaëi—prescribed duties; eva—certainly; adhikäraù—right; te—of you;
mä—never; phaleñu—in the fruits; kadäcana—at any time; mä—never;
karma-phala—in the result of the work; hetuù—cause; bhüù—become;
mä—never; te—of you; saìgaù—attachment; astu—be there; akarmaëi—in
not doing.
TRANSLATION
You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to


--- Page 84 ---
84
the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of
your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.
PURPORT
There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious work, and
inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performed while one is in the
modes of material nature. Capricious work means actions without the sanction
of authority, and inaction means not performing one's prescribed duties. The
Lord advised that Arjuna not be inactive, but that he perform his prescribed
duty without being attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of
his work is also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of the
result of such actions.
As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted into three
subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desired activities.
Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, is done without desire for
results. As one has to do it, obligatory work is action in the mode of goodness.
Work with results becomes the cause of bondage; therefore such work is not
auspicious. Everyone has his proprietory right in regard to prescribed duties,
but should act without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory
duties doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.
Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of duty
without attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is another
side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path of salvation.
Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause for bondage. Inaction is sinful.
Therefore, fighting as a matter of duty was the only auspicious path of
salvation for Arjuna.
TEXT 48


--- Page 85 ---
85
YaaeGaSQa" ku-å k-MaaRi<a Sa(r)& TYa¤-a DaNaÅYa )
iSaÖyiSaÖyae" SaMaae >aUTva SaMaTv& YaaeGa oCYaTae )) 48 ))
yoga-sthaù kuru karmäëi
saìgaà tyaktvä dhanaïjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoù samo bhütvä
samatvaà yoga ucyate
yoga-sthaù—steadfast 
in 
yoga; 
kuru—perform; 
karmäëi—your 
duty;
saìgam—attachment; 
tyaktvä—having 
abandoned; 
dhanaïjaya—O
Dhanaïjaya; siddhi-asiddhyoù—in success and failure; samaù—the same;
bhütvä—having become; samatvam—evenness of mind; yogaù-yoga; ucyate—is
called.
TRANSLATION
Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all
attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.
PURPORT
Kåñëa tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga? Yoga
means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling the
ever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is the Lord.
And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has nothing to do
with the results of the fight. Gain or victory are Kåñëa's concern; Arjuna is
simply advised to act according to the dictation of Kåñëa. The following of
Kåñëa's dictation is real yoga, and this is practiced in the process called Kåñëa
consciousness. By Kåñëa consciousness only can one give up the sense of
proprietorship. One has to become the servant of Kåñëa, or the servant of the
servant of Kåñëa. [Padyävalé 74] That is the right way to discharge duty in Kåñëa
consciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.


--- Page 86 ---
86
Arjuna is a kñatriya, and as such he is participating in the
varëäçrama-dharma institution. It is said in the Viñëu Puraëa that in the
varëäçrama-dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Viñëu. No one should satisfy
himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one should satisfy Kåñëa. So,
unless one satisfies Kåñëa, one cannot correctly observe the principles of
varëäçrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna was advised to act as Kåñëa told him.
TEXT 49
dUre<a ùvr& k-MaR buiÖYaaeGaaÖNaÅYa )
buÖaE Xar<aMaiNvC^ k*-Pa<aa" f-l/heTav" )) 49 ))
düreëa hy avaraà karma
buddhi-yogäd dhanaïjaya
buddhau çaraëam anviccha
kåpaëäù phala-hetavaù
düreëa—by 
discarding 
it 
at 
a 
long 
distance; 
hi—certainly;
avaram—abominable; karma—activities; buddhi-yogät—on the strength of
Kåñëa consciousness; dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of wealth; buddhau—in such
consciousness; çaraëam—full surrender; anviccha—desire; kåpaëäù—the
misers; phala-hetavaù—those desiring fruitive action.
TRANSLATION
O Dhanaïjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional service, and
surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of
their work are misers.
PURPORT


--- Page 87 ---
87
One who has actually come to understand one's constitutional position as
the eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save working in Kåñëa
consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means transcendental loving
service to the Lord. Such devotional service is the right course of action for the
living entity. Only misers desire to enjoy the fruit of their own work just to be
further entangled in material bondage. Except for work in Kåñëa
consciousness, all activities are abominable because they continually bind the
worker to the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Kåñëa consciousness for the
satisfaction of Kåñëa. Misers do not know how to utilize the assets of riches
which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor. One should spend all
energies working in Kåñëa consciousness, and that will make one's life
successful. Like the misers, unfortunate persons do not employ their human
energy in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 50
buiÖYau¢-ae JahaTaqh o>ae Sauk*-TaduZk*-Tae )
TaSMaaÛaeGaaYa YauJYaSv YaaeGa" k-MaRSau k-aEXal/Ma( )) 50 ))
buddhi-yukto jahätéha
ubhe sukåta-duñkåte
tasmäd yogäya yujyasva
yogaù karmasu kauçalam
buddhi-yuktaù—one who is engaged in devotional service; jahäti—can get rid
of; iha—in this life; ubhe—in both; sukåta-duñkåte—in good and bad results;
tasmät—therefore; yogäya—for the sake of devotional service; yujyasva—be so
engaged; 
yogaù—Kåñëa 
consciousness; 
karmasu—in 
all 
activities;
kauçalam—art.


--- Page 88 ---
88
TRANSLATION
A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, which is the art of
all work.
PURPORT
Since time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work, As such, he is continuously ignorant of his
real constitutional position. One's ignorance can be removed by the
instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä which teaches one to surrender unto Lord Çré
Kåñëa in all respects and become liberated from the chained victimization of
action and reaction, birth after birth. Arjuna is therefore advised to act in
Kåñëa consciousness, the purifying process of resultant action.
TEXT 51
k-MaRJa& buiÖYau¢-a ih f-l&/ TYa¤-a MaNaqiz<a" )
JaNMabNDaiviNaMauR¢-a" Pad& GaC^NTYaNaaMaYaMa( )) 51 ))
karma-jaà buddhi-yuktä hi
phalaà tyaktvä manéñiëaù
janma-bandha-vinirmuktäù
padaà gacchanty anämayam
karma-jam—because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktäù—being done in
devotional service; hi—certainly; phalam—results; tyaktvä—giving up;
manéñiëaù—devotees who are great sages; janma-bandha—the bondage of
birth 
and 
death; 
vinirmuktäù—liberated 
souls; 
padam—position;
gacchanti—reach; anämayam—without miseries.


--- Page 89 ---
89
TRANSLATION
The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and free
themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the fruits of action
in the material world. In this way they can attain that state beyond all miseries.
PURPORT
The liberated living entities seek that place where there are no material
miseries. The Bhägavatam says:
samäçritä ye padapallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhävambudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
paraà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
(Bhäg. 10.14.58)
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda or the giver of
mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf's
hoofprint. Param padam, or the place where there are no material miseries, or
Vaikuëöha, is his goal, not the place where there is danger in every step of life."
Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a
miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance only,
less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by fruitive activities,
thinking that resultant actions will make them happy. They do not know that
no kind of material body anywhere within the universe can give life without
miseries. The miseries of life, namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are
present everywhere within the material world. But one who understands his
real constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus knows
the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes qualified


--- Page 90 ---
90
to enter into the Vaikuëöha planets, where there is neither material, miserable
life, nor the influence of time and death. To know one's constitutional position
means to know also the sublime position of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks
that the living entity's position and the Lord's position are on the same level is
to be understood to be in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in
the devotional service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves
the way for the repetition of birth and death. But one who, understanding that
his position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord, at once
becomes eligible for Vaikuëöhaloka. Service for the cause of the Lord is called
karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words, devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 52
Yada Tae Maaehk-il/l&/ buiÖVYaRiTaTairZYaiTa )
Tada GaNTaaiSa iNaveRd& é[aeTaVYaSYa é[uTaSYa c )) 52 ))
yadä te moha-kalilaà
buddhir vyatitariñyati
tadä gantäsi nirvedaà
çrotavyasya çrutasya ca
yadä—when; 
te—your; 
moha—illusory; 
kalilam—dense 
forest;
buddhiù—transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitariñyati—surpasses;
tadä—at 
that 
time; 
gantäsi—you 
shall 
go; 
nirvedam—callousness;
çrotavyasya—all that is to be heard; çrutasya—all that is already heard;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion, you
shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is to be heard.


--- Page 91 ---
91
PURPORT
There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the Lord
of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simply by
devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understands Kåñëa and
his relationship with Kåñëa, he naturally becomes completely indifferent to the
rituals of fruitive activities, even though an experienced brähmaëa. Çré
Mädhavendra Puré, a great devotee and äcärya in the line of the devotees, says:
sandhyä-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoù snäna tubhyaà namo
bho deväù pitaraç ca tarpaëa-vidhau nähaà kñamaù kñamyatäm
yatra kväpi niñadya yädava-kulottamasya kaàsa-dviñaù
smäraà smäram aghaà harämi tad alaà manye kim anyena me.
[Padyävalé 79]
"O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to You. Bathing, I offer my
obeisances unto You. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuse me for my
inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I can remember the great
descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Kåñëa], the enemy of Kaàsa, and thereby I
can free myself from all sinful bondage. I think this is sufficient for me."
The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending all
kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the morning, offering
respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one is fully in Kåñëa consciousness
and is engaged in His transcendental loving service, one becomes indifferent
to all these regulative principles because he has already attained perfection. If
one can reach the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa, he has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as
recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not understood
that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Kåñëa and simply engages in the
rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such engagements. Persons in
Kåñëa consciousness transcend the limit of çabda-brahma, or the range of the


--- Page 92 ---
92
Vedas and Upaniñads.
TEXT 53
é[uiTaivPa[iTaPaàa Tae Yada SQaaSYaiTa iNaêl/a )
SaMaaDaavcl/a buiÖSTada YaaeGaMavaPSYaiSa )) 53 ))
çruti-vipratipannä te
yadä sthäsyati niçcalä
samädhäv acalä buddhis
tadä yogam aväpsyasi
çruti—Vedic revelation; vipratipannä—without being influenced by the
fruitive results of the Vedas; te—your; yadä—when; sthäsyati—remains;
niçcalä—unmoved; samädhau—in transcendental consciousness, or Kåñëa
consciousness; acalä—unflinching; buddhiù—intelligence; tadä—at that time;
yogam—self-realization; aväpsyasi—you will achieve.
TRANSLATION
When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization, then you will
have attained the Divine consciousness.
PURPORT
To say that one is in samädhi is to say that one has fully realized Kåñëa
consciousness; that is, one in full samädhi has realized Brahman, Paramätmä
and Bhagavän. The highest perfection of self-realization is to understand that
one is eternally the servitor of Kåñëa and that one's only business is to
discharge one's duties in Kåñëa consciousness. A Kåñëa conscious person, or
unflinching devotee of the Lord, should not be disturbed by the flowery


--- Page 93 ---
93
language of the Vedas nor be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the
heavenly kingdom. In Kåñëa consciousness, one comes directly into
communion with Kåñëa, and thus all directions from Kåñëa may be understood
in that transcendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities
and attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders of Kåñëa
or His representative, the spiritual master.
TEXT 54
AJauRNa ovac
iSQaTaPa[jSYa k-a >aaza SaMaaiDaSQaSYa ke-Xav )
iSQaTaDaq" ik&- Pa[>aazeTa ik-MaaSaqTa v]JaeTa ik-Ma( )) 54 ))
arjuna uväca
sthita-prajïasya kä bhäñä
samädhi-sthasya keçava
sthita-dhéù kià prabhäñeta
kim äséta vrajeta kim
arjuna uväca—Arjuna said; sthita-prajïasya—of one who is situated in fixed
Kåñëa consciousness; kä—what; bhäñä—language; samädhi-sthasya—of one
situated in trance; keçava—O Kåñëa; sthita-dhéù—one fixed in Kåñëa
consciousness; kim—what; prabhäñeta—speak; kim—how; äséta—does remain;
vrajeta—walk; kim—how.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: What are the symptoms of one whose consciousness is thus
merged in Transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his language? How
does he sit, and how does he walk?


--- Page 94 ---
94
PURPORT
As there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his particular
situation, similarly one who is Kåñëa conscious has his particular
nature—talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a rich man has his
symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseased man has his
symptoms, by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned man has his
symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Kåñëa has specific
symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specific symptoms from the
Bhagavad-gétä. Most important is how the man in Kåñëa consciousness speaks,
for speech is the most important quality of any man. It is said that a fool is
undiscovered as long as he does not speak, and certainly a well-dressed fool
cannot be identified unless he speaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals
himself at once. The immediate symptom of a Kåñëa conscious man is that he
speaks only of Kåñëa and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then
automatically follow, as stated below.
TEXT 55
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Pa[JahaiTa Yada k-aMaaNSavaRNPaaQaR MaNaaeGaTaaNa( )
AaTMaNYaevaTMaNaa Tauí" iSQaTaPa[jSTadaeCYaTae )) 55 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
prajahäti yadä kämän
sarvän pärtha mano-gatän
ätmany evätmanä tuñöaù
sthita-prajïas tadocyate
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;


--- Page 95 ---
95
prajahäti—gives up; yadä—when; kämän—desires for sense gratification;
sarvän—of all varieties; pärtha—O son of Påthä; manaù-gatän—of mental
concoction; ätmani—in the pure state of the soul; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by
the purified mind; tuñöaù—satisfied; sthita-prajïaù—transcendentally situated;
tadä—at that time; ucyate—is said.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: O Pärtha, when a man gives up all varieties of sense
desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind finds satisfaction
in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.
PURPORT
The Bhägavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Kåñëa
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the good qualities of
the great sages, whereas a person who is not so transcendentally situated has no
good qualifications, because he is sure to be taking refuge in his own mental
concoctions. Consequently, it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all
kinds of sense desire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such
sense desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness,
then, automatically, sense desires subside without extraneous efforts.
Therefore, one has to engage himself in Kåñëa consciousness without
hesitation, for this devotional service will instantly help one on to the platform
of transcendental consciousness. The highly developed soul always remains
satisfied in himself by realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Lord. Such a transcendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting
from petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural position
of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 56


--- Page 96 ---
96
du"%eZvNauiÜGanMaNaa" Sau%ezu ivGaTaSPa*h" )
vqTaraGa>aYa§-aeDa" iSQaTaDaqMauRiNaåCYaTae )) 56 ))
duùkheñv anudvigna-manäù
sukheñu vigata-spåhaù
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhaù
sthita-dhér munir ucyate
duùkheñu—in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manäù—without being
agitated in mind; sukheñu—in happiness; vigata-spåhaù—without being too
interested; véta—free from; räga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhaù—anger;
sthita-dhéù—one who is steady; muniù—sage; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated
when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is
called a sage of steady mind.
PURPORT
The word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said that every
muni has a different angle of vision, and unless a muni differs from other
munis, he cannot be called a muni in the strict sense of the term. Näsau munir
yasya mataà na binnam. But a sthita-dhé-muni as mentioned herein by the
Lord, is different from an ordinary muni. The sthita-dhé-muni is always in Kåñëa
consciousness, for he has exhausted all his business of creative speculation. He
has surpassed the stage of mental speculations and has come to the conclusion
that Lord Çré Kåñëa, or Väsudeva, is everything. [Bg. 7.19] He is called a muni
fixed in mind. Such a fully Kåñëa conscious person is not at all disturbed by the
onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he accepts all miseries as the mercy of


--- Page 97 ---
97
the Lord, thinking himself only worthy of more trouble due to his past
misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries, by the grace of the Lord, are minimized
to the lowest. Similarly, when he is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking
himself unworthy of the happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord's
grace that he is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better
service to the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring and
active and is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachment means
accepting things for one's own sense gratification, and detachment is the
absence of such sensual attachment. But one fixed in Kåñëa consciousness has
neither attachment nor detachment because his life is dedicated in the service
of the Lord. Consequently he is not at all angry even when his attempts are
unsuccessful. A Kåñëa conscious person is always steady in his determination.
TEXT 57
Ya" SavR}aaNai>aòehSTataTPa[aPYa éu>aaéu>aMa( )
Naai>aNaNdiTa Na Üeií TaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 57 ))
yaù sarvatränabhisnehas
tat tat präpya çubhäçubham
näbhinandati na dveñöi
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä
yaù—one who; sarvatra—everywhere; anabhisnehaù—without affection;
tat—that; 
tat—that; 
präpya—achieving; 
çubha—good; 
açubham—evil;
na—never; 
abhinandati—prays; 
na—never; 
dveñöi—envies; 
tasya—his;
prajïä—perfect knowledge; pratiñöhita—fixed.
TRANSLATION
He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains good,


--- Page 98 ---
98
nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfect knowledge.
PURPORT
There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good or
evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is unaffected by
good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Kåñëa consciousness. As long
as one is in the material world there is always the possibility of good and evil
because this world is full of duality. But one who is fixed in Kåñëa
consciousness is not affected by good and evil because he is simply concerned
with Kåñëa, who is all good absolute. Such consciousness in Kåñëa situates one
in a perfect transcendental position called, technically, samädhi.
TEXT 58
Yada Sa&hrTae caYa& kU-MaaeR_(r)aNaqv SavRXa" )
wiNd]Yaa<aqiNd]YaaQaeR>YaSTaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 58 ))
yadä saàharate cäyaà
kürmo 'ìgänéva sarvaçaù
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyas
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä
yadä—when; 
saàharate—winds 
up; 
ca—also; 
ayam—all 
these;
kürmaù—tortoise; 
aìgäni—limbs; 
iva—like; 
sarvaçaù—altogether;
indriyäni—senses; indriya-arthebhyaù—from the sense objects; tasya—his;
prajïä—consciousness; pratiñöhitä—fixed up.
TRANSLATION
One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise
draws his limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly situated in


--- Page 99 ---
99
knowledge.
PURPORT
The test of a yogé, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able to control
the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, are servants of the
senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the senses. That is the answer
to the question as to how the yogé is situated. The senses are compared to
venomous serpents. They want to act very loosely and without restriction. The
yogé, or the devotee, must be very strong to control the serpents—like a snake
charmer. He never allows them to act independantly. There are many
injunctions in the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not's, and some of
them are do's. Unless one is able to follow the do's and the do-not's, restricting
oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to be firmly fixed in Kåñëa
consciousness. The best example, set herein, is the tortoise. The tortoise can at
any moment wind up his senses and exhibit them again at any time for
particular purposes. Similarly, the senses of the Kåñëa conscious persons are
used only for some particular purpose in the service of the Lord and are
withdrawn otherwise. Keeping the senses always in the service of the Lord is
the example set by the analogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.
TEXT 59
ivzYaa iviNavTaRNTae iNaraharSYa deihNa" )
rSavJa| rSaae_PYaSYa Par& d*îa iNavTaRTae )) 59 ))
viñayä vinivartante
nirähärasya dehinaù
rasa-varjaà raso 'py asya
paraà dåñövä nivartate


--- Page 100 ---
100
viñayäù—objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante—are practiced to be
refrained from; nirähärasya—by negative restrictions; dehinaù—for the
embodied; rasa-varjam—giving up the taste; rasaù—sense of enjoyment;
api—although there is; asya—his; param—far superior things; dåñövä—by
experiencing; nivartate—ceases from.
TRANSLATION
The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste
for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by experiencing a
higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.
PURPORT
Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease from sense
enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment by rules and
regulations is something like restricting a diseased person from certain types of
eatables. The patient, however, neither likes such restrictions, nor loses his
taste for eatables. Similarly, sense restriction by some spiritual process like
añöäìga-yoga, in the matter of yama, niyama, äsana, präëäyäma, pratyähära,
dharaëä, dhyäna, etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no
better knowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa, in the course of his advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, no longer has
a taste for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for the less
intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life, but such restrictions
are only good if one actually has a taste for Kåñëa consciousness. When one is
actually Kåñëa conscious, he automatically loses his taste for pale things.
TEXT 60
YaTaTaae ùiPa k-aENTaeYa PauåzSYa ivPaiêTa" )


--- Page 101 ---
101
wiNd]Yaai<a Pa[MaaQaqiNa hriNTa Pa[Sa>a& MaNa" )) 60 ))
yatato hy api kaunteya
puruñasya vipaçcitaù
indriyäëi pramäthéni
haranti prasabhaà manaù
yatataù—while endeavoring; hi—certainly; api—in spite of; kaunteya—O son
of Kunté; puruñasya—of the man; vipaçcitaù—full of discriminating knowledge;
indriyäëi—the senses; pramäthéni—stimulated; haranti—throws forcefully;
prasabhaà—by force; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly carry
away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring to control
them.
PURPORT
There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who try
to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even the greatest of them
sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment due to the agitated mind.
Even Viçvämitra, a great sage and perfect yogé, was misled by Menakä into sex
enjoyment, although the yogé was endeavoring for sense control with severe
types of penance and yoga practice. And, of course, there are so many similar
instances in the history of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control
the mind and the senses without being fully Kåñëa conscious. Without
engaging the mind in Kåñëa, one cannot cease such material engagements. A
practical example is given by Çré Yämunäcärya, a great saint and devotee, who
says: "Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of Lord
Kåñëa, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor, whenever


--- Page 102 ---
102
I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns from it, and I spit at the
thought."
Kåñëa consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing that
automatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a hungry man
had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity of nutritious eatables.
Mahäräja Ambaréña also conquered a great yogé, Durväsä Muni, simply because
his mind was engaged in Kåñëa consciousness. [Bhäg. 9.4.18]
TEXT 61
TaaiNa SavaRi<a Sa&YaMYa Yau¢- AaSaqTa MaTPar" )
vXae ih YaSYaeiNd]Yaai<a TaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 61 ))
täni sarväëi saàyamya
yukta äséta mat-paraù
vaçe hi yasyendriyäëi
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä
täni—those 
senses; 
sarväëi—all; 
saàyamya—keeping 
under 
control;
yuktaù—being engaged; äséta—being so situated; mat-paraù—in relationship
with Me; vaçe—in full subjugation; hi—certainly; yasya—one whose;
indriyäëi—senses; tasya—his; prajïä—consciousness; pratiñöhitä—fixed.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me is known
as a man of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
That the highest conception of yoga perfection is Kåñëa consciousness is


--- Page 103 ---
103
clearly explained in this verse. And, unless one is Kåñëa conscious, it is not at
all possible to control the senses. As cited above, the great sage Durväsä Muni
picked a quarrel with Mahäräja Ambaréña, and Durväsä Muni unnecessarily
became angry out of pride and therefore could not check his senses. On the
other hand, the King, although not as powerful a yogé as the sage, but a devotee
of the Lord, silently tolerated all the sage's injustices and thereby emerged
victorious. The King was able to control his senses because of the following
qualifications, as mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayor
vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänavarëane
karau harer mandira-märjanädiñu
çrutià cakäräcyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-liìgälaya-darçane dåçau
tad-bhåtya-gätra-sparçe'ìga-saìgamam
ghräëaà ca tat-päda-saroja-saurabhe
çrémat-tulasyä rasanäà tad-arpite
pädau hareù kñetra-padänusarpaëe
çiro håñékeça-padäbhivandane
kämaà ca däsye na tu käma-kämyayä
yathottamaçloka-janäçrayä ratiù
"King Ambaréña fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, engaged his
words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the temple of
the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the
form of the Lord, his body in touching the body of the devotee, his nostrils in
smelling the flavor of the flowers offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his
tongue in tasting the tulasé leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the
holy place where His temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto
the Lord, and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord ... and all these


--- Page 104 ---
104
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-paraù devotee of the Lord." (Bhäg.
9.4.18-20)
The word mat-paraù is most significant in this connection. How one can
become a mat-paraù is described in the life of Mahäräja Ambaréña. Çréla
Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, a great scholar and äcärya in the line of the
mat-paraù, remarks: "mad-bhakti-prabhävena sarvendriya-vijaya-pürvikä svätma
dåñöiù sulabheti bhävaù." "The senses can be completely controlled only by the
strength of devotional service to Kåñëa." Also the example of fire is sometimes
given: "As the small flames within burn everything within the room, similarly
Lord Viñëu, situated in the heart of the yogé, burns up all kinds of impurities."
The Yoga-sütra also prescribes meditation on Viñëu, and not meditation on the
void. The so-called yogés who meditate on something which is not the Viñëu
form simply waste their time in a vain search after some phantasmagoria. We
have to be Kåñëa conscious—devoted to the Personality of Godhead. This is
the aim of the real yoga.


--- Page 105 ---
105


--- Page 106 ---
106
TEXT 62
DYaaYaTaae ivzYaaNPau&Sa" Sa(r)STaezUPaJaaYaTae )
Sa(r)aTSaÅaYaTae k-aMa" k-aMaaT§-aeDaae_i>aJaaYaTae )) 62 ))
dhyäyato viñayän puàsaù
saìgas teñüpajäyate
saìgät saïjäyate kämaù
kämät krodho 'bhijäyate
dhyayataù—while contemplating; viñayän—sense objects; puàsaù—of the
person; saìgaù—attachment; teñu—in the sense objects; upajäyate—develops;
saìgät—attachment; 
saïjäyate—develops; 
kämaù—desire; 
kämät—from
desire; krodhaù—anger; abhijäyate—becomes manifest.
TRANSLATION
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment
for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.
PURPORT
One who is not Kåñëa conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of senses. The senses require real engagements, and
if they are not engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, they
will certainly seek engagement in the service of materialism. In the material
world everyone, including Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä—to say nothing of
other demigods in the heavenly planets—is subjected to the influence of sense
objects, and the only method to get out of this puzzle of material existence is to
become Kåñëa conscious. Lord Çiva was deep in meditation, but when Pärvaté
agitated him for sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a result
Kärtikeya was born. When Haridäsa Öhäkur was a young devotee of the Lord,


--- Page 107 ---
107
he was similarly allured by the incarnation of Mäyä Devé, but Haridäsa easily
passed the test because of his unalloyed devotion to Lord Kåñëa. As illustrated
in the above-mentioned verse of Çré Yämunäcärya, a sincere devotee of the
Lord shuns all material sense enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual
enjoyment in the association of the Lord. That is the secret of success. One
who is not, therefore, in Kåñëa consciousness, however powerful he may be in
controlling the senses by artificial repression, is sure ultimately to fail, for the
slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him to gratify his desires.
TEXT 63
§-aeDaaÙviTa SaMMaaeh" SaMMaaehaTSMa*iTaiv>a]Ma" )
SMa*iTa>a]&Xaad(buiÖNaaXaae buiÖNaaXaaTPa[<aXYaiTa )) 63 ))
krodhäd bhavati sammohaù
sammohät småti-vibhramaù
småti-bhraàçäd buddhi-näço
buddhi-näçät praëaçyati
krodhät—from anger; bhavati—takes place; saàmohaù—perfect illusion;
saàmohät—from illusion; småti—of memory; vibhramaù—bewilderment;
småti-bhraàçät—after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-näçaù—loss of
intelligence; buddhi-näçät—and from loss of intelligence; praëaçyati—falls
down.
TRANSLATION
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory.
When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost,
one falls down again into the material pool.


--- Page 108 ---
108
PURPORT
By development of Kåñëa consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of Kåñëa
consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as a result, although
they desire liberation from material bondage, they do not attain to the perfect
stage of renunciation. On the other hand, a person in Kåñëa consciousness
knows how to use everything in the service of the Lord; therefore he does not
become a victim of material consciousness. For example, for an impersonalist,
the Lord, or the Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an
impersonalist tries to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Kåñëa is the
supreme enjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,
after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes the remnants, called
prasädam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized and there is no danger of a
downfall. The devotee takes prasädam in Kåñëa consciousness, whereas the
nondevotee rejects it as material. The impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy
life due to his artificial renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of
the mind pulls him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said
that such a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls down
again due to his not having support in devotional service.
TEXT 64
raGaÜezivMau¢E-STau ivzYaaiNaiNd]YaEêrNa( )
AaTMavXYaEivRDaeYaaTMaa Pa[SaadMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 64 ))
räga-dveña-vimuktais tu
viñayän indriyaiç caran
ätma-vaçyair vidheyätmä
prasädam adhigacchati


--- Page 109 ---
109
räga—attachment; dveña—detachment; vimuktaiù—by one who has been free
from such things; tu—but; viñayän—sense objects; indriyaiù—by the senses;
caran—acting; ätma-vaçyaiù—one who has control over; vidheyätmä—one
who follows regulated freedom; prasädam—the mercy of the Lord;
adhigacchati—attains.
TRANSLATION
One who can control his senses by practicing the regulated principles of
freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus become free from
all attachment and aversion.
PURPORT
It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by some
artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in the transcendental
service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall. Although the person in full
Kåñëa consciousness may apparently be on the sensual plane, because of his
being Kåñëa conscious, he has no attachment to sensual activities. The Kåñëa
conscious person is concerned only with the satisfaction of Kåñëa, and nothing
else. Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Kåñëa wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Kåñëa does not
want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily done for his own
satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within his control because he acts
only under the direction of Kåñëa. This consciousness is the causeless mercy of
the Lord, which the devotee can achieve in spite of his being attached to the
sensual platform.
TEXT 65
Pa[Saade SavRdu"%aNaa& haiNarSYaaePaJaaYaTae )


--- Page 110 ---
110
Pa[SaàceTaSaae ùaéu buiÖ" PaYaRviTaïTae )) 65 ))
prasäde sarva-duùkhänäà
hänir asyopajäyate
prasanna-cetaso hy äçu
buddhiù paryavatiñöhate
prasäde—on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva—all;
duùkhänäm—material 
miseries; 
häniù—destruction; 
asya—his;
upajäyate—takes 
place; 
prasanna-cetasaù—of 
the 
happy-minded;
hi—certainly; äçu—very soon; buddhiù—intelligence; pari—sufficiently;
avatiñöhate—established.
TRANSLATION
For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold miseries
of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state, one's intelligence
soon becomes steady.
TEXT 66
NaaiSTa buiÖrYau¢-SYa Na caYau¢-SYa >aavNaa )
Na ca>aavYaTa" XaaiNTarXaaNTaSYa ku-Ta" Sau%Ma( )) 66 ))
nästi buddhir ayuktasya
na cäyuktasya bhävanä
na cäbhävayataù çäntir
açäntasya kutaù sukham
na 
asti—there 
cannot 
be; 
buddhiù—transcendental 
intelligence;
ayuktasya—of one who is not connected (with Kåñëa consciousness);


--- Page 111 ---
111
na—neither; ca—and; ayuktasya—of one devoid of Kåñëa consciousness;
bhävanä—mind fixed in happiness; na—neither; ca—and; abhävayataù—one
who is not fixed; çäntiù—peace; açäntasya—of the unpeaceful; kutaù—where
is; sukham—happiness.
TRANSLATION
One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a controlled
mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no possibility of peace. And
how can there be any happiness without peace?
PURPORT
Unless one is in Kåñëa consciousness, there is no possibility of peace. So it is
confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one understands that Kåñëa is
the only enjoyer of all the good results of sacrifice and penance, and that He is
the proprietor of all universal manifestations, that He is the real friend of all
living entities, then only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not in
Kåñëa consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance is
due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Kåñëa is the
enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then one can, with
a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who is engaged without a
relationship with Kåñëa is certainly always in distress and is without peace,
however much one may make a show of peace and spiritual advancement in
life. Kåñëa consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be
achieved only in relationship with Kåñëa.
TEXT 67
wiNd]Yaa<aa& ih crTaa& YaNMaNaae_NauivDaqYaTae )


--- Page 112 ---
112
TadSYa hriTa Pa[ja& vaYauNaaRviMavaM>aiSa )) 67 ))
indriyäëäà hi caratäà
yan mano 'nuvidhéyate
tad asya harati prajïäà
väyur nävam ivämbhasi
indriyäëäm—of the senses; hi—certainly; caratäm—while herding over;
yat—that; 
manaù—mind; 
anuvidhéyate—becomes 
constantly 
engaged;
tat—that; 
asya—his; 
harati—takes 
away; 
prajïäm—intelligence;
väyuù—wind; nävam—a boat; iva—like; ambhasi—on the water.
TRANSLATION
As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the
senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.
PURPORT
Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even one of
them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from the path of
transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of Mahäräja Ambaréña,
all of the senses must be engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, for that is the correct
technique for controlling the mind.
TEXT 68
TaSMaaÛSYa Mahabahae iNaGa*hqTaaiNa SavRXa" )
wiNd]Yaa<aqiNd]YaaQaeR>YaSTaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 68 ))
tasmäd yasya mahä-bäho


--- Page 113 ---
113
nigåhétäni sarvaçaù
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyas
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä
tasmät—therefore; yasya—of one's; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one;
nigåhétäni—so curbed down; sarvaçaù—all around; indriyäëi—the senses;
indriya-arthebhyaù—for 
the 
sake 
of 
sense 
objects; 
tasya—his;
prajïä—intelligence; pratiñöhitä—fixed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly, the senses can be curbed
not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in the service
of the Lord. One who has understood this—that only by Kåñëa consciousness
is one really established in intelligence and that one should practice this art
under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master—is called sädhaka, or a
suitable candidate for liberation.
TEXT 69
Yaa iNaXaa SavR>aUTaaNaa& TaSYaa& JaaGaiTaR Sa&YaMaq )
YaSYaa& JaaGa]iTa >aUTaaiNa Saa iNaXaa PaXYaTaae MauNae" )) 69 ))
yä niçä sarva-bhütänäà
tasyäà jägarti saàyamé
yasyäà jägrati bhütäni
sä niçä paçyato muneù


--- Page 114 ---
114
yä—what; niçä—is night; sarva—all; bhütänäm—of living entities; tasyäm—in
that; jägarti—wakeful; saàyamé—the self-controlled; yasyäm—in which;
jägrati—awake; bhütäni—all beings; sä—that is; niçä—night; paçyataù—for
the introspective; muneù—sage.
TRANSLATION
What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;
and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage.
PURPORT
There are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in material
activities for sense gratification, and the other is introspective and awake to
the cultivation of self-realization. Activities of the introspective sage, or
thoughtful man, are night for persons materially absorbed. Materialistic
persons remain asleep in such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization.
The introspective sage remains alert in the "night" of the materialistic men.
The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement of spiritual
culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities, being asleep to
self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense pleasure, feeling sometimes happy
and sometimes distressed in his sleeping condition. The introspective man is
always indifferent to materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his
self-realization activities undisturbed by material reaction.
TEXT 70
AaPaUYaRMaa<aMacl/Pa[iTaï&
 SaMaud]MaaPa" Pa[ivXaiNTa YaÜTa( )
TaÜTk-aMaa Ya& Pa[ivXaiNTa SaveR


--- Page 115 ---
115
 Sa XaaiNTaMaaPanaeiTa Na k-aMak-aMaq )) 70 ))
äpüryamäëam acala-pratiñöhaà
samudram äpaù praviçanti yadvat
tadvat kämä yaà praviçanti sarve
sa çäntim äpnoti na käma-kämé
äpüryamäëam—always 
filled; 
acala-pratiñöham—steadily 
situated;
samudram—the 
ocean; 
äpaù—water; 
praviçanti—enter; 
yadvat—as;
tadvat—so; kämäù—desires; yam—unto one; praviçanti—enter; sarve—all;
saù—that 
person; 
çäntim—peace; 
äpnoti—achieves; 
na—not;
käma-kämé—one who desires to fulfill desires.
TRANSLATION
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter
like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is always still—can alone
achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.
PURPORT
Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always, especially
during the rainy season, being filled with much more water. But the ocean
remains the same—steady; it is not agitated, nor does it cross beyond the limit
of its brink. That is also true of a person fixed in Kåñëa consciousness. As long
as one has the material body, the demands of the body for sense gratification
will continue. The devotee, however, is not disturbed by such desires because
of his fullness. A Kåñëa conscious man is not in need of anything because the
Lord fulfills all his material necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean—always
full in himself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers that flow
into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is not even slightly
disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is the proof of a Kåñëa


--- Page 116 ---
116
conscious man—one who has lost all inclinations for material sense
gratification, although the desires are present. Because he remains satisfied in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord, he can remain steady, like the
ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace. Others, however, who fulfill desires even
up to the limit of liberation, what to speak of material success, never attain
peace. The fruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogés who are after
mystic powers, are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But the person in
Kåñëa consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and he has no desires
to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desire liberation from the so-called
material bondage. The devotees of Kåñëa have no material desires, and
therefore they are in perfect peace.
TEXT 71
ivhaYa k-aMaaNYa" SavaRNPauMaa&êriTa iNa"SPa*h" )
iNaMaRMaae iNarhªar" Sa XaaiNTaMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 71 ))
vihäya kämän yaù sarvän
pumäàç carati niùspåhaù
nirmamo nirahaìkäraù
sa çäntim adhigacchati
vihäya—after giving up; kämän—all material desires for sense gratification;
yaù—the 
person; 
sarvän—all; 
pumän—a 
person; 
carati—lives;
nihñpåhaù—desireless; 
nirmamaù—without 
a 
sense 
of 
proprietorship;
nirahaìkäraù—without 
false 
ego; 
saù—all; 
çäntim—perfect 
peace;
adhigacchati—attains.
TRANSLATION
A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free


--- Page 117 ---
117
from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false
ego—he alone can attain real peace.
PURPORT
To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense gratification.
In other words, desire for becoming Kåñëa conscious is actually desirelessness.
To understand one's actual position as the eternal servitor of Kåñëa, without
falsely claiming this material body to be oneself and without falsely claiming
proprietorship over anything in the world, is the perfect stage of Kåñëa
consciousness. One who is situated in this perfect stage knows that because
Kåñëa is the proprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for
the satisfaction of Kåñëa. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sense
satisfaction, but when he became fully Kåñëa conscious he fought because
Kåñëa wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire to fight, but for
Kåñëa the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desire for the satisfaction of
Kåñëa is really desirelessness; it is not an artificial attempt to abolish desires.
The living entity cannot be desireless or senseless, but he does have to change
the quality of the desires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that
everything belongs to Kåñëa (éçäväsyam idaà sarvam), and therefore he does
not falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental knowledge
is based on self-realization—namely, knowing perfectly well that every living
entity is the eternal part and parcel of Kåñëa in spiritual identity. and
therefore the eternal position of the living entity is never on the level of Kåñëa
or greater than Him. This understanding of Kåñëa consciousness is the basic
principle of real peace.
TEXT 72
Wza b]aøq iSQaiTa" PaaQaR NaENaa& Pa[aPYa ivMauùiTa )


--- Page 118 ---
118
iSQaTvaSYaaMaNTak-ale/_iPa b]øiNavaR<aMa*C^iTa )) 72 ))
eñä brähmé sthitiù pärtha
nainäà präpya vimuhyati
sthitväsyäm anta-käle 'pi
brahma-nirväëam åcchati
eñä—this; brähmé—spiritual; sthitiù—situation; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
na—never; 
enäm—this; 
präpya—achieving; 
vimuhyati—bewilders;
sthitvä—being so situated; asyäm—being so; anta-käle—at the end of life;
api—also; brahma-nirväëam—spiritual (kingdom of God); åcchati—attains.
TRANSLATION
That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which a man is
not bewildered. Being so situated, even at the hour of death, one can enter into
the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
One can attain Kåñëa consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second—or one may not attain such a state of life even after millions of births.
It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact. Khaöväìga
Mahäräja attained this state of life just a few minutes before his death, by
surrendering unto Kåñëa. Nirväëa means ending the process of materialistic
life. According to Buddhist philosophy, there is only void after the completion
of this material life, but Bhagavad-gétä teaches differently. Actual life begins
after the completion of this material life. For the gross materialist it is
sufficient to know that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for
persons who are spiritually advanced, there is another life after this
materialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomes Kåñëa
conscious, he at once attains the stage of Brahma-nirväëa. There is no


--- Page 119 ---
119
difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional service of the Lord.
Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to be engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord is to have attained the spiritual
kingdom. In the material world there are activities of sense gratification,
whereas in the spiritual world there are activities of Kåñëa consciousness.
Attainment of Kåñëa consciousness even during this life is immediate
attainment of Brahman, and one who is situated in Kåñëa consciousness has
certainly already entered into the kingdom of God.
Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brähmé sthitiù means "not
on the platform of material activities." Devotional service of the Lord is
accepted in the Bhagavad-gétä [14.26] as the liberated stage. Therefore,
brähmé-sthitiù is liberation from material bondage.
Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkur has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gétä as being the contents for the whole text. In the Bhagavad-gétä,
the subject matters are karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, and bhakti-yoga. In the Second
Chapter karma-yoga and jïäna-yoga have been clearly discussed, and a glimpse
of bhakti-yoga has also been given, as the contents for the complete text.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of its Contents.
