--- Page 1 ---
1
15. The Yoga of the Supreme Person


--- Page 2 ---
2
TEXT 1
é[q>aGavaNauvac )


--- Page 3 ---
3
OßRMaUl/MaDa"Xaa%MaìTQa& Pa[ahurVYaYaMa( )
^Nda&iSa YaSYa Pa<aaRiNa YaSTa& ved Sa vedivTa( )) 1 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
ürdhva-mülam adhaù-çäkham
açvatthaà prähur avyayam
chandäàsi yasya parëäni
yas taà veda sa veda-vit
çré 
bhagavän 
uväca—the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead 
said;
ürdhva-mülam—with roots above; adhaù—downwards; çäkham—branches;
açvattham—banyan tree; prähuù—said; avyayam—eternal; chandäàsi—Vedic
hymns; yasya—of which; parëäni—the leaves; yaù—anyone; tam—that;
veda—knows; saù—he; veda-vit—the knower of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots upward
and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows
this tree is the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may question,
"What about the Vedas?" It is explained in this chapter that the purpose of
Vedic study is to understand Kåñëa. Therefore one who is in Kåñëa
consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, already knows the Vedas.
The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan tree.
For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to the banyan
tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to another. The tree
of this material world has no end, and for one who is attached to this tree,


--- Page 4 ---
4
there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedic hymns, meant for elevating
oneself, are called the leaves of this tree. This tree's roots grow upward because
they begin from where Brahmä is located, the topmost planet of this universe.
If one can understand this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out
of it.
This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous chapters it
has been explained that there are many processes by which to get out of the
material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth Chapter, we have seen that
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is the best way. Now, the basic
principle of devotional service is detachment from material activities and
attachment to the transcendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking
attachment to the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that it begins
from the total material substance, from the topmost planet of the universe.
From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so many branches,
representing the various planetary systems. The fruits represent the results of
the living entities' activities, namely, religion, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation.
Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with its
branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That tree can be
found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the trees on the bank reflect
upon the water with their branches down and roots up. In other words, the tree
of this material world is only a reflection of the real tree of the spiritual world.
This reflection of the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as the tree's
reflection is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things' being situated in
this reflected material light. One who wants to get out of this material
existence must know this tree thoroughly through analytical study. Then he
can cut off his relationship with it.
This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take Brahmä to


--- Page 5 ---
5
be the root of this material tree, and from the root, according to säìkhya
philosophy, come prakåti, puruña, then the three guëas, then the five gross
elements (païca-mahäbhüta), then the ten senses (daçendriya), mind, etc. In
this way they divide up the whole material world. If Brahmä is the center of all
manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of the center by 180
degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute the spiritual world. The material
world is the perverted reflection, so the spiritual world must have the same
variegatedness, but in reality. The prakåti is the external energy of the Supreme
Lord, and the puruña is the Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä. Since this manifestation is material, it is temporary. A
reflection is temporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But
the origin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The material
reflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that a person knows
the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut off attachment to this
material world. If one knows that process, he actually knows the Vedas. One
who is attracted by the ritualistic formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the
beautiful green leaves of the tree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the
Vedas. The purpose of the Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead
Himself, is to cut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the
spiritual world.
TEXT 2
ADaêaeß| Pa[Sa*TaaSTaSYa Xaa%a Gau<aPa[v*Öa ivzYaPa[val/a" )
ADaê MaUl/aNYaNauSaNTaTaaiNa k-MaaRNaubNDaqiNa MaNauZYal/aeke- )) 2 ))
adhaç cordhvaà prasåtäs tasya çäkhä
guëa-pravåddhä viñaya-praväläù
adhaç ca müläny anusantatäni
karmänubandhéni manuñya-loke


--- Page 6 ---
6
adhaù—downward; 
ca—and; 
ürdhvam—upward; 
prasåtäù—extended;
tasya—its; 
çäkhäù—branches; 
guëa—modes 
of 
material 
nature;
pravåddhäù—developed; 
viñaya—sense 
objects; 
praväläù—twigs;
adhaù—downward; 
ca—and; 
müläni—roots; 
anusantatäni—extended;
karma—according to work; anubandhéni—bound; manuñya-loke—in the world
of human society.
TRANSLATION
The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the senses. This
tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the fruitive actions of
human society.
PURPORT
The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches
are spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated
manifestations of living entities, such as human beings, animals, horses, cows,
dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower parts of the branches, whereas
on the upper parts are higher forms of living entities: the demigods,
Gandharvas (fairies), and many other higher species of life. As a tree is
nourished by water, so this tree is nourished by the three modes of material
nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of land is barren for want of sufficient
water, and sometimes a tract is very green; similarly, where the modes of
material nature are proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of
life are manifested in that proportion.
The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By development
of the different modes of nature, we develop different senses, and, by the
senses, we enjoy different varieties of sense objects. The source of the
senses—the ears, the nose, eyes, etc.—is considered to be the upper twigs,


--- Page 7 ---
7
tuned to the enjoyment of different sense objects. The leaves are sound, form,
touch—the sense objects. The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products
of different varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop
attachment and aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are
considered to be the secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root
is from Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary systems.
After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the upper planetary
systems, he comes down to this earth and renews his karma or fruitive
activities for promotion. This planet of human beings is considered the field of
activities.
TEXTS 3-4
Na æPaMaSYaeh TaQaaePal/>YaTae NaaNTaae Na caidNaR c SaMPa[iTaïa )
AìTQaMaeNa& Sauivæ!MaUl/‚ MaSa(r)Xañe<a d*!eNa i^tva )) 3 ))
TaTa" Pad& TaTPairMaaiGaRTaVYa& YaiSMaNGaTaa Na iNavTaRiNTa >aUYa" )
TaMaev caÛ& Pauåz& Pa[PaÛe YaTa" Pa[v*ita" Pa[Sa*Taa Paura<aq )) 4 ))
na rüpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nänto na cädir na ca sampratiñöhä
açvattham enaà suvirüòha-mülam
asaìga-çastreëa dåòhena chittvä
tataù padaà tat parimärgitavyaà
yasmin gatä na nivartanti bhüyaù
tam eva cädyaà puruñaà prapadye
yataù pravåttiù prasåtä puräëé
na—not; rüpam—form; asya—of this tree; iha—in this; tathä—also;
upalabhyate—can be perceived; na—never; antaù—end; na—never; ca—also;
ädiù—beginning; 
na—never; 
ca—also; 
sampratiñöhä—the 
foundation;


--- Page 8 ---
8
açvattham—banyan tree; enam—this; suvirüòha—strongly; mülam—rooted;
asaìga-çastreëa—by the weapon of detachment; dåòhena—strong; chittvä—by
cutting; tataù—thereafter; padam—situation; tat—that; parimärgitavyam—has
to 
be 
searched 
out; 
yasmin—where; 
gatäù—going; 
na—never;
nivartanti—comes back; bhüyaù—again; tam—to him; eva—certainly;
ca—also; 
ädyam—original; 
puruñam—the 
Personality 
of 
Godhead;
prapadye—surrender; 
yataù—from 
whom; 
pravåttiù—beginning;
prasåtä—extension; puräëé—very old.
TRANSLATION
The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with
determination one must cut down this tree with the weapon of detachment. So
doing, one must seek that place from which, having once gone, one never
returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from
whom everything has begun and in whom everything is abiding since time
immemorial.
PURPORT
It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot be
understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the extension of
the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how far the tree extends, nor
can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet one has to find out the cause. "I am
the son of my father, my father is the son of such and such a person, etc." By
searching in this way, one comes to Brahmä, who is generated by the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Finally, in this way, when one reaches to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, that is the end of research work. One has to search out
that origin of this tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the
association of persons who are in the knowledge of that Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this


--- Page 9 ---
9
false reflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection
and actually become situated in the real tree.
The word asaìga is very important in this connection because the
attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very
strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science
based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hear from persons who are
actually in knowledge. As a result of such discussion in the association of
devotees, one comes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the first
thing one must do is surrender to Him. The description of that place whence
going no one returns to this false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the original root from whom everything has
emanated. To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only to
surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by hearing,
chanting, etc. He is the cause of this extension of this material world. This is
already explained by the Lord Himself: ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù. "I am the
origin of everything."
Therefore to get out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of
material life, one must surrender to Kåñëa. As soon as one surrenders unto
Kåñëa, he becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
TEXT 5
iNaMaaRNaMaaeha iJaTaSa(r)daeza ADYaaTMaiNaTYaa iviNav*tak-aMaa" )
ÜNÜEivRMau¢-a" Sau%du"%Sa&jE‚ GaRC^NTYaMaU!a" PadMaVYaYa& TaTa( )) 5 ))
nirmäna-mohä jita-saìga-doñä
adhyätma-nityä vinivåtta-kämäù
dvandvair vimuktäù sukha-duùkha-saàjïair
gacchanty amüòhäù padam avyayaà tat


--- Page 10 ---
10
nir—without; mäna—respect; mohäù—illusion; jita—having conquered;
saìga—association; doñäù—faulty; adhyätma—spiritual; nityäù—eternity;
vinivåtta—associated; 
kämäù—lusts; 
dvandvaiù—with 
duality;
vimuktäù—liberated; 
sukha-duùkha—happiness 
and 
distress;
saàjïaiù—named; 
gacchanti—attains; 
amüòhäù—unbewildered;
padam—situation; avyayam—eternal; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
One who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association, who
understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and is freed from the
duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how to surrender unto the
Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.
PURPORT
The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material nature, it is
very difficult for him to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One should know by the cultivation of real knowledge that he is not lord of
material nature; the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is
free from delusion caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For
one who is always expecting some honor in this material world, it is not
possible to surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for
although one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, he has the
foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makes all things
complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole world moves under this
impression. People are considering that the land, this earth, belongs to human
society, and they have divided the land under the false impression that they
are the proprietors. One has to get out of this false notion that human society


--- Page 11 ---
11
is the proprietor of this world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he
becomes free from all the false associations caused by familial, social, and
national affections. These fake associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to cultivate
knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually not his own. And,
when one has an understanding of things as they are, he becomes free from all
dual conceptions such as happiness and distress, pleasure and pain. He becomes
full in knowledge; then it is possible for him to surrender to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
Na TaÙaSaYaTae SaUYaaeR Na XaXaaªae Na Paavk-" )
YaÓTva Na iNavTaRNTae TaÖaMa ParMa& MaMa )) 6 ))
na tad bhäsayate süryo
na çaçäìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama
na—not; 
tat—that; 
bhäsayate—illuminates; 
süryaù—sun; 
na—nor;
çaçäìkaù—the moon; na—nor; pävakaù—fire, electricity; yat—where;
gatvä—going; na—never; nivartante—comes back; tat dhäma—that abode;
paramam—supreme; mama—My.
TRANSLATION
That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by electricity.
One who reaches it never returns to this material world.
PURPORT


--- Page 12 ---
12
The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa—which is known as Kåñëaloka, Goloka Våndävana—is described here.
In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine, fire or electricity,
because all the planets are self-luminous. We have only one planet in this
universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but all the planets in the spiritual sky
are self-luminous. The shining effulgence of all those planets (called
Vaikuëöhas) constitutes the shining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually,
the effulgence is emanating from the planet of Kåñëa, Goloka Våndävana. Part
of that shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.
Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of spiritual
planets, which are called Vaikuëöhas, chief of which is Goloka Våndävana.
As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in conditional
life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky, by cutting through the false,
perverted tree of this material world, he becomes liberated. Then there is no
chance of his coming back here. In his conditional life, the living entity
considers himself to be the lord of this material world, but in his liberated state
he enters into the spiritual kingdom and becomes the associate of the Supreme
Lord. There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.
One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to transfer
himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this false reflection of
reality. For one who is too much attached to this material world, it is very
difficult to cut that attachment, but if he takes to Kåñëa consciousness, there is
a chance of gradually becoming detached. One has to associate himself with
devotees, those who are in Kåñëa consciousness. One should search out a
society dedicated to Kåñëa consciousness and learn how to discharge
devotional service. In this way he can cut off his attachment to the material
world. One cannot become detached from the attraction of the material world
simply by dressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the
devotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it very seriously that
devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapter is the only way to get


--- Page 13 ---
13
out of this false representation of the real tree. In Chapter Fourteen the
contamination of all kinds of processes by material nature is described. Only
devotional service is described as purely transcendental.
The words paramaà mama are very important here. Actually every nook
and corner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world is
paramam, full of six opulences. In the Upaniñads it is also confirmed that in the
spiritual world there is no need of sunshine or moonshine, for the whole
spiritual sky is illuminated by the internal potency of the Supreme Lord. That
supreme abode can be achieved only by surrender and by no other means.
TEXT 7
MaMaEva&Xaae Jaqvl/aeke- Jaqv>aUTa" SaNaaTaNa" )
MaNa"zïaNaqiNd]Yaai<a Pa[k*-iTaSQaaiNa k-zRiTa )) 7 ))
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
mama—My; eva—certainly; aàçaù—fragmental particles; jéva-loke—world of
conditional 
life; 
jéva-bhütaù—the 
conditioned 
living 
entities;
sanätanaù—eternal; 
manaù—mind; 
ñañöhäni—six; 
indriyäëi—senses;
prakåti—material nature; sthäni—situated; karñati—struggling hard.
TRANSLATION
The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind.


--- Page 14 ---
14
PURPORT
In this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The living
entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord—eternally. It is
not that he assumes individuality in his conditional life and in his liberated
state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He is eternally fragmented. It is
clearly said, sanätanaù. According to the Vedic version, the Supreme Lord
manifests and expands Himself in innumerable expansions, of which the
primary expansions are called Viñëu-tattva, and the secondary expansions are
called the living entities. In other words, the Viñëu-tattva is the personal
expansion, and the living entities are separated expansions. By His personal
expansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Räma, Nåsiàha-deva,
Viñëumürti and all the predominating Deities in the Vaikuëöha planets. The
separated expansions, the living entities, are eternally servitors. The personal
expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the individual identities of
the Godhead, are always present. Similarly, the separated expansions of living
entities have their identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, the living entities have also fragmental qualities, of which independence
is one. Every living entity has an individual soul, his personal individuality and
a minute form of independence. By misuse of that independence, one becomes
a conditioned soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated.
In either case, he is qualititatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In his
liberated state he is freed from this material condition, and he is under the
engagement of transcendental service unto the Lord; in his conditioned life he
is dominated by the material modes of nature, and he forgets the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result, he has to struggle very
hard to maintain his existence in the material world.
The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs, but
even the greater controllers of the material world—Brahmä, Lord Çiva, and
even Viñëu—are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. They are all


--- Page 15 ---
15
eternal, not temporary manifestations. The word karñati (struggling or
grappling hard) is very significant. The conditioned soul is bound up, as though
shackled by iron chains. He is bound up by the false ego, and the mind is the
chief agent which is driving him in this material existence. When the mind is
in the mode of goodness, his activities are good; when the mind is in the mode
of passion, his activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of
ignorance, he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear, however, in this
verse, that the conditioned soul is covered by the material body, with the mind
and the senses, and when he is liberated this material covering perishes, but his
spiritual body manifests in its individual capacity. The following information is
there in the Mädhyandi-näyana-çruti(1): sa vä eña brahma-niñöhä idaà saréraà
marttyam atisåjya brahmäbhisampadya brahmaëä paçyati brahmaëä çånoti
brahmaëaivedaà sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living entity
gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritual world, he
revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear and speak to Him face to
face, and he can understand the Supreme Personality as He is. In småti also it is
understood that in the spiritual planets everyone lives in bodies featured like
the Supreme Personality of Godhead's. As far as bodily construction is
concerned, there is no difference between the part and parcel living entities
and the expansions of Viñëumürti. In other words, at liberation the living
entity gets a spiritual body by the grace of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
The word mamaiväàçaù (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord)
is also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is not like
some material broken part. We have already understood in the Second Chapter
that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragment is not materially
conceived. It is not like matter which can be cut into pieces and joined
together again. That conception is not applicable here because the Sanskrit
word sanätana (eternal) is used. The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also
stated in the beginning of the Second Chapter that (dehino 'smin yathä) in


--- Page 16 ---
16
each and every individual body, the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is
present. That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily
entanglement, revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a
spiritual planet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,
understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one, just as the parts and parcels of gold are
also gold.
TEXT 8
Xarqr& YadvaPanaeiTa YaÀaPYauT§-aMaTaqìr" )
Ga*hqTvETaaiNa Sa&YaaiTa vaYauGaRNDaaiNavaXaYaaTa( )) 8 ))
çaréraà yad aväpnoti
yac cäpy utkrämatéçvaraù
gåhétvaitäni saàyäti
väyur gandhän iväçayät
çaréram—body; yat—as much as; aväpnoti—gets; yat—that which; ca—also;
api—virtually; utkrämati—gives up; éçvaraù—the lord of the body;
gåhétvä—taking; 
etäni—all 
these; 
saàyäti—goes 
away; 
väyuù—air;
gandhän—smell; iva—like; äçayät—from the flower.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in the material world carries his different conceptions of
life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.
PURPORT
Here the living entity is described as éçvara, the controller of his own body.
If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and if he likes he can


--- Page 17 ---
17
move to a lower class. Minute independence is there. The change his body
undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death, the consciousness he has
created will carry him on to the next type of body. If he has made his
consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is sure to change to a cat's or dog's
body. And, if he has fixed his consciousness on godly qualities, he will change
into the form of a demigod. And, if he is in Kåñëa consciousness, he will be
transferred to Kåñëaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Kåñëa. It
is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is finished.
The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to another, and his
present body and present activities are the background of his next body. One
gets a different body according to karma, and he has to quit this body in due
course. It is stated here that the subtle body, which carries the conception of
the next body, develops another body in the next life. This process of
transmigrating from one body to another and struggling while in the body is
called karñati or struggle for existence.
TEXT 9
é[ae}a& c+au" SPaXaRNa& c rSaNa& ga]a<aMaev c )
AiDaïaYa MaNaêaYa& ivzYaaNauPaSaevTae )) 9 ))
çrotraà cakñuù sparçanaà ca
rasanaà ghräëam eva ca
adhiñöhäya manaç cäyaà
viñayän upasevate
çrotram—ears; cakñuù—eyes; sparçanam—touch; ca—also; rasanam—tongue;
ghräëam—smelling power; eva—also; ca—and; adhiñöhäya—being situated;
manaù—mind; 
ca—also; 
ayam—this; 
viñayän—sense 
objects;
upasevate—enjoys.


--- Page 18 ---
18
TRANSLATION
The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain type of
ear, tongue, and nose and sense of touch, which are grouped about the mind. He
thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.
PURPORT
In other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with the
qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog body and enjoys.
Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we mix water with a certain
color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness is pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But
consciousness is changed according to the association of the material qualities.
Real consciousness is Kåñëa consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated in
Kåñëa consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if his consciousness is
adulterated by some type of material mentality, in the next life he gets a
corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a human body again; he can
get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or one of many other forms, for there
are 8,400,000 species.
TEXT 10
oT§-aMaNTa& iSQaTa& vaiPa >auÅaNa& va Gau<aaiNvTaMa( )
ivMaU!a NaaNauPaXYaiNTa PaXYaiNTa jaNac+auz" )) 10 ))
utkrämantaà sthitaà väpi
bhuïjänaà vä guëänvitam
vimüòhä nänupaçyanti
paçyanti jïäna-cakñuñaù
utkrämantam—quitting the body; sthitam—situated in the body; väpi—either;


--- Page 19 ---
19
bhuïjänam—enjoying; vä—or; guëa-anvitam—under the spell of the modes of
material nature; vimüòhäù—foolish persons; na—never; anupaçyanti—can see;
paçyanti—one can see; jïäna-cakñuñaù—one who has the eyes of knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body, nor can
they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of the modes of
nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can see all this.
PURPORT
The word jïäna-cakñuñaù is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what form
of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is living in a
particular type of body. This requires a great amount of knowledge understood
from Bhagavad-gétä and similar literatures heard from a bona fide spiritual
master. One who is trained to perceive all these things is fortunate. Every
living entity is quitting his body under certain circumstances; he is living
under certain circumstances and enjoying under certain circumstances under
the spell of material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of
happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons who are
everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power of understanding their
change of body and their stay in a particular body. They cannot comprehend
it. Those who have developed spiritual knowledge, however, can see that the
spirit is different from the body and is changing its body and enjoying in
different ways. A person in such knowledge can understand how the
conditioned living entity is suffering in this material existence. Therefore
those who are highly developed in Kåñëa consciousness try their best to give
this knowledge to the people in general, for their conditional life is very much
troublesome. They should come out of it and be Kåñëa conscious and liberate
themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.


--- Page 20 ---
20
TEXT 11
YaTaNTaae YaaeiGaNaêENa& PaXYaNTYaaTMaNYaviSQaTaMa( )
YaTaNTaae_PYak*-TaaTMaaNaae NaENa& PaXYaNTYaceTaSa" )) 11 ))
yatanto yoginaç cainaà
paçyanty ätmany avasthitam
yatanto 'py akåtätmäno
nainaà paçyanty acetasaù
yatantaù—endeavoring; yoginaù—transcendentalists; ca—also; enam—this;
paçyanti—can 
see; 
ätmani—in 
the 
self; 
avasthitam—situated;
yatantaù—although endeavoring; api—although; akåta-ätmänaù—without
self-realization; 
na—does 
not; 
enam—this; 
paçyanti—can 
see;
acetasaù—undeveloped mind.
TRANSLATION
The endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization, can see
all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-realization cannot see
what is taking place, though they may try to.
PURPORT
There are many transcendentalists in the path of spiritual self-realization,
but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are
changing in the body of the living entity. The word yoginaù is significant in
this connection. In the present day there are many so-called yogés, and there
are many so-called associations of yogés, but they are actually blind in the
matter of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic
exercise and are satisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no


--- Page 21 ---
21
other information. They are called yatanto 'py akåtätmänaù. Even though they
are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized. Such
people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only
those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world,
and the Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-yogés, those engaged in pure
devotional service in Krsëa consciousness, can understand how things are
taking place.
TEXT 12
YadaidTYaGaTa& TaeJaae JaGaÙaSaYaTae_i%l/Ma( )
YaÀNd]MaiSa YaÀaGanaE TataeJaae iviÖ MaaMak-Ma( )) 12 ))
yad äditya-gataà tejo
jagad bhäsayate 'khilam
yac candramasi yac cägnau
tat tejo viddhi mämakam
yat—that which; äditya-gatam—in the sunshine; tejaù—splendor; jagat—the
whole world; bhäsayate—illuminates; akhilam—entirely; yat—that which;
candramasi—in the moon; yat—that which; ca—also; agnau—in the fire;
tat—that; tejaù—splendor; viddhi—understand; mämakam—from Me.
TRANSLATION
The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world,
comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire are also
from Me.
PURPORT
The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The


--- Page 22 ---
22
beginning of knowledge can be established by understanding what the Lord
explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity. One should
simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, the splendor of the
moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire are coming from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In such a conception of life, the beginning of Kåñëa
consciousness, lies a great deal of advancement for the conditioned soul in this
material world. The living entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord, and He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to
Godhead, back to home. From this verse we can understand that the sun is
illuminating the whole solar system. There are different universes and solar
systems, and there are different suns, moons and planets also. Sunlight is due
to the spiritual effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. With the
rise of the sun, the activities of human beings are set up. They set fire to
prepare their foodstuff; they set fire to start the factories, etc. So many things
are done with the help of fire. Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so
pleasing to the living entities. Without their help no living entity can live. So
if one can understand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are
emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, then one's Kåñëa
consciousness will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetables are nourished.
The moonshine is so pleasing that people can easily understand that they are
living by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa. Without
His mercy there cannot be sun, without His mercy there cannot be moon, and
without His mercy there cannot be fire, and without the help of sun, moon and
fire, no one can live. These are some thoughts to provoke Kåñëa consciousness
in the conditioned soul.
TEXT 13
GaaMaaivXYa c >aUTaaiNa DaarYaaMYahMaaeJaSaa )


--- Page 23 ---
23
PauZ<aaiMa caEzDaq" SavaR" SaaeMaae >aUTva rSaaTMak-" )) 13 ))
gäm äviçya ca bhütäni
dhärayämy aham ojasä
puñëämi cauñadhéù sarväù
somo bhütvä rasätmakaù
gäm—the planets; äviçya—entering; ca—also; bhütäni—living entities;
dhärayämi—sustaining; aham—I; ojasä—by My energy; puñëämi—nourishing;
ca—and; 
auñadhéù—all 
vegetables; 
sarväù—all; 
somaù—the 
moon;
bhütvä—becoming; rasa-ätmakaù—supplying the juice.
TRANSLATION
I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become the
moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.
PURPORT
It is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by the energy
of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet, and every living
being. That is discussed in the Brahmä-saàhitä. It is said there that one plenary
portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä, enters into the
planets, the universe, the living entity, and even into the atom. So due to His
entrance, everything is appropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is there,
a living man can float on the water, but when the living spark is out of the
body and the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed it floats
just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is dead, he at once sinks
in the water. Similarly, all these planets are floating in space, and this is due to
the entrance of the supreme energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
His energy is sustaining each planet, just like a handful of dust. If someone
holds a handful of dust, there is no possibility of the dust falling, but if one


--- Page 24 ---
24
throws it in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which are floating
in air, are actually held in the fist of the universal form of the Supreme Lord.
By His strength and energy, all moving and unmoving things stay in their
place. It is said that because of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is
shining and the planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the
planets would scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes all vegetables. Due
to the moon's influence, the vegetables become delicious. Without the
moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nor taste succulent. Human
society is working, living comfortably and enjoying food due to the supply from
the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, mankind could not survive. The word
rasätmakaù is very significant. Everything becomes palatable by the agency of
the Supreme Lord through the influence of the moon.
TEXT 14
Ah& vEìaNarae >aUTva Pa[ai<aNaa& dehMaaié[Ta" )
Pa[a<aaPaaNaSaMaaYau¢-" PacaMYaà& cTauivRDaMa( )) 14 ))
ahaà vaiçvänaro bhütvä
präëinäà deham äçritaù
präëäpäna-samäyuktaù
pacämy annaà catur-vidham
aham—I; vaiçvänaraù—by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhütvä—becoming; 
präëinäm—of 
all 
living 
entities; 
deham—body;
äçritaù—situated; 
präëa—outgoing 
air; 
apäna—downgoing 
air;
samäyuktaù—keep 
balance; 
pacämi—digest; 
annam—foodstuff;
catur-vidham—four kinds of.


--- Page 25 ---
25
TRANSLATION
I am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of life,
outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds of foodstuff.
PURPORT
According to Äyur-vedic çästra, we understand that there is a fire in the
stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not blazing, there is
no hunger, and when the fire is in order, we become hungry. Sometimes when
the fire is not going nicely, treatment is required. In any case, this fire is
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vedic(2) mantras also
confirm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the form of fire
within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff. Therefore since He
is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff, the living entity is not
independant in the eating process. Unless the Supreme Lord helps him in
digesting, there is no possibility of eating. He thus produces and digests
foodstuff, and, by His grace, we are enjoying life. In the Vedänta-sütra(3) this is
also confirmed: çabdädibhyo 'ntaù pratiñöhänäc ca. The Lord is situated within
sound and within the body, within the air and even within the stomach as the
digestive force. There are four kinds of foodstuff: some are swallowed, some are
chewed, some are licked up, and some are sucked, and He is the digestive force
for all of them.
TEXT 15
SavRSYa cah& ôid Saiàivíae Mata" SMa*iTajaRNaMaPaaehNa& c )
vedEê SavŒrhMaev veÛae vedaNTak*-Üedivdev cahMa( )) 15 ))
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca


--- Page 26 ---
26
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedänta-kåd veda-vid eva cäham
sarvasya—of all living beings; ca—and; aham—I; hådi—in the heart;
sanniviñöaù—being 
situated; 
mattaù—from 
Me; 
småtiù—remembrance;
jïänam—knowledge; apohanam ca—and forgetfulness; vedaiù—by the Vedas;
ca—also; sarvaiù—all; aham—I am; eva—certainly; vedyaù—knowable;
vedänta-kåt—the compiler of the Vedänta; veda-vit—the knower of the Vedas;
eva—certainly; ca—and; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known; indeed I am the compiler
of Vedänta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramätmä in everyone's heart, and it is
from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything
of his past life, but he has to act according to the direction of the Supreme
Lord, who is witness to all his work. Therefore he begins his work according to
his past deeds. Required knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is
given to him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only
all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards the
different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as the impersonal
Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the localized Paramätmä,
but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as well. The Vedas give the
right direction to the people so that they can properly mold their lives and
come back to Godhead, back to home. The Vedas offer knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and Kåñëa in His incarnation as
Vyäsadeva is the compiler of the Vedänta-sütra. The commentation on the


--- Page 27 ---
27
Vedänta-sütra by Vyäsadeva in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives the real
understanding of Vedänta-sütra. The Supreme Lord is so full that for the
deliverance of the conditioned soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff,
the witness of his activity, the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, the teacher of the
Bhagavad-gétä. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good;
God is all-merciful.
Antaùpraviñöaù(4) çästä janänäm. The living entity forgets as soon as he
quits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the Supreme
Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence to renew his
work where he ended his last life. So not only does a living entity enjoy or
suffer in this world according to the dictation from the Supreme Lord situated
locally in the heart, but he receives the opportunity to understand Vedas from
Him. If one is serious to understand the Vedic knowledge, then Kåñëa gives the
required intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for
understanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understand Kåñëa.
Vedic(5) literature confirms this: yo 'sau sarvair vedair géyate. In all Vedic
literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedänta-sütra and the Upaniñads
and Puräëas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performing
Vedic rituals, discussing the Vedic philosophy and worshiping the Lord in
devotional service, He is attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to
understand Kåñëa. The Vedas give us direction to understand Kåñëa and the
process of understanding. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Vedänta-sütra(6) confirms this in the following words: tat tu
samanvayät. One can attain perfection by understanding Vedic literature, and
one can understand his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by performing the different processes. Thus one can approach Him and at the
end attain the supreme goal, who is no other than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In this verse, however, the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding
of the Vedas and the goal of Vedas are clearly defined.


--- Page 28 ---
28
TEXT 16
ÜaivMaaE PauåzaE l/aeke- +arêa+ar Wv c )
+ar" SavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa kU-$=SQaae_+ar oCYaTae )) 16 ))
dväv imau puruñau loke
kñaraç cäkñara eva ca
kñaraù sarväëi bhütäni
küöastho 'kñara ucyate
dvau—two; imau—in this (world); puruñau—living entities; loke—in the
world; kñaraù—fallible; ca—and; akñaraù—infallible; eva—certainly; ca—and;
kñaraù—the fallible; sarväëi—all; bhütäni—living entities; küöasthaù—in
oneness; akñaraù—infallible; ucyate—is said.
TRANSLATION
There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In the material
world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world every entity is called
infallible.
PURPORT
As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyäsadeva compiled
the Vedänta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents of the
Vedänta-sütra: He says that the living entities, who are innumerable, can be
divided into two classes—the fallible and the infallible. The living entities are
eternally separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When they are in contact with the material world, they are called jéva-bhütäù,
and the Sanskrit words given here, sarväëi bhütäni mean that they are fallible.
Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however,


--- Page 29 ---
29
are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have no individuality,
but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable to the purpose of the
creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, there is no such thing as creation,
but since the Supreme Personality of Godhead has stated in the Vedänta-sütra
that He is the source of all emanations, that conception is explained.
According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa, there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this, so there is
no doubt about it. The living entities, who are struggling in this world with the
mind and five senses, have their material bodies which are changing as long as
the living entities are conditioned. One's body changes due to contact with
matter; matter is changing, so the living entity appears to be changing. But in
the spiritual world the body is not made of matter; therefore there is no
change. In the material world the living entity undergoes six changes—birth,
growth, duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are the
changes of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body does not
change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death. There all exists
in oneness. It is more clearly explained as sarväëi bhütäni: any living entity
who has come in contact with matter, beginning from the first created being,
Brahmä, down to a small ant, is changing its body; therefore they are all
fallible. In the spiritual world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.
TEXT 17
otaMa" PauåzSTvNYa" ParMaaTMaeTYaudaôTa" )
Yaae l/aek-}aYaMaaivXYa ib>aTYaRVYaYa wRìr" )) 17 ))
uttamaù puruñas tv anyaù
paramätmety udähåtaù
yo loka-trayam äviçya
bibharty avyaya éçvaraù


--- Page 30 ---
30
uttamaù—the 
best; 
puruñaù—personality; 
tu—but; 
anyaù—another;
param—the Supreme; ätmä—Self; iti—thus; udähåtaù—said; yaù—one who;
loka—of the universe; trayam—the three divisions; äviçya—entering;
bibharti—maintaining; avyayaù—inexhaustible; éçvaraù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord Himself,
who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.
PURPORT
This verse is very nicely expressed in the Kaöha Upaniñad and Çvetäçvatara
Upaniñad(7). It is clearly stated there that above the innumerable living
entities, some of whom are conditioned and some of whom are liberated, there
is the Supreme Personality who is Paramätmä. The Upanisadic verse runs as
follows: nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm. The purport is that amongst all the
living entities, both conditioned and liberated, there is one supreme living
personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who maintains them and
gives them all the facility of enjoyment according to different work. That
Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone's heart as Paramätmä.
A wise man who can understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not
others.
It(8) is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as
being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the question of
superiority and inferiority in their personalities. This particular word uttama is
very significant. No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Loke
is also significant because in the Pauruña, a Vedic(9) literature, it is stated:
lokyate vedärtho 'nena. This Supreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramätmä
explains the purpose of the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the
Vedas(10):


--- Page 31 ---
31
tävad eña samprasädo 'smäc
charérät samutthäya paraà
jyoti-rüpaà sampadya svena
rüpeëäbhiniñpadyate sa uttamaù puruñaù
"The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal brahmajyoti; then
in His form He remains in His spiritual identity. That Supreme is called the
Supreme Personality." This means that the Supreme Personality is exhibiting
and diffusing His spiritual effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That
Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramätmä. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavaté and Paräçara, He explains the Vedic knowledge
as Vyäsadeva.


--- Page 32 ---
32


--- Page 33 ---
33
TEXT 18
YaSMaaT+arMaTaqTaae_hMa+aradiPa caetaMa" )
ATaae_iSMa l/aeke- vede c Pa[iQaTa" PauåzaetaMa" )) 18 ))
yasmät kñaram atéto 'ham
akñaräd api cottamaù
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitaù puruñottamaù
yasmät—because; kñaram—the fallible; atétaù—transcendental; aham—I;
akñarät—from the infallible; api—better than that; ca—and; uttamaù—the
best; ataù—therefore; asmi—I am; loke—in the world; vede—in the Vedic
literature; ca—and; prathitaù—celebrated; puruñottamaù—as the Supreme
Personality.
TRANSLATION
Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as
that Supreme Person.
PURPORT
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa—neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, the greatest of
personalities. Now it is clear here that the living entities and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are individuals. The difference is that the living
entities, either in the conditioned state or in the liberated state, cannot surpass
in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.


--- Page 34 ---
34
TEXT 19
Yaae MaaMaevMaSaMMaU!ae JaaNaaiTa PauåzaetaMaMa( )
Sa SavRivÙJaiTa Maa& SavR>aaveNa >aarTa )) 19 ))
yo mäm evam asammüòho
jänäti puruñottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mäà
sarva-bhävena bhärata
yaù—anyone; mäm—unto Me; evam—certainly; asammüòhaù—without a
doubt; jänäti—knows; puruñottamam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
saù—he; sarva-vit—knower of everything; bhajati—renders devotional
service; mäm—unto Me; sarva-bhävena—in all respects; bhärata—O son of
Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is to be understood as the knower of everything, and he therefore
engages himself in full devotional service, O son of Bharata
PURPORT
There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional position
of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in this verse the
Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that anyone who knows Lord
Kåñëa as the Supreme Person is actually the knower of everything. The
imperfect knower goes on simply speculating about the Absolute Truth, but the
perfect knower, without wasting his valuable time, engages directly in Kåñëa
consciousness, the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the


--- Page 35 ---
35
whole of Bhagavad-gétä, this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there
are so many stubborn commentators on Bhagavad-gétä who consider the
Supreme Absolute Truth and the living entities to be one and the same.
Vedic knowledge is called çruti learning by aural reception. One should
actually receive the Vedic message from authorities like Kåñëa and His
representatives. Here Kåñëa distinguishes everything very nicely, and one
should hear from this source. Simply to hear like the hogs is not sufficient; one
must be able to understand from the authorities. It is not that one should
simply speculate academically. One should submissively hear from
Bhagavad-gétä that these living entities are always subordinate to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Anyone who is able to understand this, according to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, knows the purpose of the
Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of the Vedas.
The word bhajate is very significant. In many places the word bhajate is
expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If a person is
engaged in full Kåñëa consciousness in devotional service of the Lord, it is to be
understood that he has understood all the Vedic knowledge. In the Vaiñëava
paramparä it is said that if one is engaged in the devotional service of Kåñëa,
then there is no need for a spiritual process to understand the Supreme
Absolute Truth. He has already come to the post because he is engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes of
understanding; similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of
thousands of lives, does not come to the point that Kåñëa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, all his speculation
for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.
TEXT 20
wiTa GauùTaMa& XaañiMadMau¢&- MaYaaNaga )


--- Page 36 ---
36
WTad(bud(ßa buiÖMaaNSYaaTk*-Tak*-TYaê >aarTa )) 20 ))
iti guhyatamaà çästram
idam uktaà mayänagha
etad buddhvä buddhimän syät
kåta-kåtyaç ca bhärata
iti—thus; guhyatamam—the most confidential; çästram—revealed scriptures;
idam—this; uktam—disclosed; mayä—by Me; anagha—O sinless one;
etat—this; 
buddhvä—understanding; 
buddhimän—intelligent; 
syät—one
becomes; kåta-kåtyaù—the most perfect; ca—and; bhärata—O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and
it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will become wise, and his
endeavors will know perfection.
PURPORT
The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all revealed
scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent and perfect in
transcendental knowledge. In other words, by understanding this philosophy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging in His transcendental
service, everyone can become freed from all contaminations of the modes of
material nature. Devotional service is a process of spiritual understanding.
Wherever devotional service exists, the material contamination cannot
coexist. Devotional service to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the
same because they are spiritual—the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The
Lord is said to be the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is
present, there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional


--- Page 37 ---
37
service is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritual master,
there is no question of ignorance.
Everyone must take to this consciousness of Kåñëa and engage in devotional
service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes to this position of
understanding Kåñëa and engages in devotional service, however intelligent he
may be in the estimation of some common man, he is not perfectly intelligent.
The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha, O
sinless one, means that unless one is free from all sinful reactions, it is very
difficult to understand Kåñëa. One has to become free from all contamination,
all sinful activities; then he can understand. But devotional service is so pure
and potent that once one is engaged in devotional service he automatically
comes to the stage of sinlessness.
While performing devotional service in the association of pure devotees in
full Kåñëa consciousness, there are certain things which require to be
vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount is
weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to lord it over
material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental loving service of the
Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is that as one increases the
propensity of lording it over material nature, he becomes attached to matter
and the possession of matter. The problems of material existence are due to
these weaknesses of the heart.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Puruñottama-yoga, the Yoga of the
Supreme Person.


--- Page 38 ---
38
Endnotes
1 (Popup - Popup)
sa vä eña brahma-niñöha idaà çaréraà martyam atisåjya brahmäbhisampadya
brahmaëäpaçyati brahmaëä çåëoti brahmaëaivedaà sarvam anubhavati
This jéva fixed in the brahman giving up his material body, and attains brahman.
He sees by brahman, hears by brahman, experiences everything by brahman.
(Mädhyandinäyana çruti)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.8]
2 (Popup - Popup)
The çåuti says ayam agnir vaiçvänaro yo'yam antaù puruñe yenedaà annaà
pacyate: the Lord is the fire of digestion which is within man and by which
food is digested. (Båhad Äraëyaka Upaniñad 5.9.1) That I alone am the body of
the digestive fire, assisting in digestion, is also stated by the author of Vedänta.
çabdädibhyo'ntaù pratiñöhänäc ca: if there be objection that the fire of digestion
is not Viñëu, because of opposing statements and His residing in the human
body, the answer is that the fire is Viñëu, because meditation on Visnu is
taught. (Vedänta Sütras 1.2.27)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.14]
3 (Popup - Popup)
Vedänta-sütra 1.2.27
Sütra 27
çabdädibhyo 'ntaù pratiñöhänäc ca neti cen na tathä dåñöy-upadeçäd asambhavät
puruña-vidham api cainam adhéyate
    çabda—the words; ädibhyaù—beginning with; antaù—within;
pratiñöhänät—because of abiding; ca—and; na—not; iti—thus; cet—if;
na—not; 
tathä—thus; 
dåñöi—sight; 
upadeçät—from 
the 
teaching;


--- Page 39 ---
39
asambhavät—because of being impossible; puruña—a person; vidham—the
nature; api—also; ca—and; enam—Him; adhéyate—is read.
If (it is said the "vaiçvänara" here) cannot (be Lord Viñëu) because many
words here refute this idea and because (the "vaiçvänara" is said here) to reside
in the heart, (then I say) no because the teaching (of the scriptures is that one
should) meditate (on Lord Viñëu in the heart) in this way, because it is not
possible (to interpret the word here to mean anything else), and because (the
text here describes the vaiçvänara") as a person with a humanlike form.
4 (Popup - Popup)
The çruti says antaù-praviñöaù çästä janänäm: He has entered within as the
controller of all people. 
(Taittiréya Äraëyaka 3.11)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.15]
5 (Popup - Popup)
The çruti says 
yo' sau sarvair vedair géyate: 
(yaù—who; asau—He; sarvaiù—by all; vedaiù—the Vedas; géyate—is
glorified;)
It is He who is praised by all the Vedas. (Gopäla Täpané Upaniñad, 2.27)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.15]
6 (Popup - Popup)
Thus the author of the vedänta says tat tu samanvayät: 
Viñëu is the subject of the Vedas because that is the meaning of all Vedic
texts. 
(Vedänta Sütras 1.1.4)
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.15]


--- Page 40 ---
40
tat tu samanvayät
 tat—this fact; tu—but; samanvayät—because of the agreement of all the
Vedic scriptures.
7 (Popup - Popup)
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.13
Text 13
nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
 eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän
tat-käraëaà saìkhya-yogädhigamyaà
 jïätvä devaà mucyate sarva-päçaiù
  nityaù—the single eternal; nityänäm—among the many eternal; cetanaù—the
single conscious living entity; cetanänäm—among the many conscious living
entities; ekaù—the one; bahunam—of the many; yaù—who; vidadhati—who
grants; kamän—the desires and necessities; tat-käraëaà—the ultimate cause
of 
everything; 
saìkhya-yoga—by 
the 
process 
of 
saìkhya-yoga;
adhigamyam—approachable; jïätvä—having understood; devam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; mucyate—becomes liberated; sarva-päçaiù—from all
bonds of material existance.
 They who know the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme
eternal among all eternals and the supreme conscious entity among all conscious
entities, who fulfills everyone's desires and needs, who is the cause of all causes,
and who is attained by saìkhya-yoga, become free of all bondage.
8 (Popup - Popup)
Revised Bg has the following as part of the purport to the next verse: Bg
15.18
Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa's Gétä Bhüñaëa also has the quoted slokas in the


--- Page 41 ---
41
next verse: Bg 15.18.
9 (Popup - Popup)
loke pauruñeyägame lokyate vedärtho'nena iti nirukteù
[Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, commentary Bg. 15.18]
----------------------------------------------------
As confirmed in the Nirukti dictionary, lokyate vedärtho 'nena: "The
purpose of the Vedas is explained by the småti scriptures." [Revised Bg. 15.18]
10 (Popup - Popup)
tävad eña samprasädo’smäc 
charérät samutthäya paraà 
jyotérüpaà sampadya svena 
rüpeëäbhiniñpadyate, sa uttamaù puruñaù
The ätmä, the object of mercy, rising from its body, attains the supreme
light, the Supreme Person, and manifests his natural form. (Chändogya
Upaniñad 8.12.3)
(Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa, Gétä Bhüñaëa 15.18)
